[Amit Varma]: Before you listen to this episode of the scene in the unseen, I have a recommendation for
[Amit Varma]: you. Do check out Pulya Bazi, hosted by Saurabh Chandra and Pranay Kotesane, two really good
[Amit Varma]: friends of mine. Kickass podcast in Hindi. It's amazing.
[Amit Varma]: Why are there no good people in Indian politics? That's a question I often hear. And much of
[Amit Varma]: the time, it's a rhetorical question, a lament. I attempted an explanation for this in a column
[Amit Varma]: a few months ago, through the lens of economics, as you'd expect, looking at the incentives
[Amit Varma]: of leaders through the ages. We had great leaders during our freedom struggle because
[Amit Varma]: the men and women who stepped forward had little chance of acquiring any kind of power
[Amit Varma]: or personal glory, and were instead animated by ideals and principles and similar silly
[Amit Varma]: little things that are missing in modern politics. The politician today, on the other hand, seems
[Amit Varma]: motivated only by the lust for power, by the desire to be part of the parasitic rent-seeking
[Amit Varma]: apparatus of government, by the desire to rule rather than serve. Political parties
[Amit Varma]: today are like rival mafias competing for the levers of power. And in these circumstances,
[Amit Varma]: most self-respecting people stay the hell away from politics. This does not mean that
[Amit Varma]: all politicians are bad people, just that it becomes almost impossible for even a good
[Amit Varma]: person in Indian politics, once she has entered the fray, to do good things. This is not just
[Amit Varma]: because of the incentives that draw people to politics, but also the nature of the political
[Amit Varma]: economy, which almost seems designed, sometimes, to paralyze action. So what do we do? The
[Amit Varma]: incentives of politics are morally corrosive. The circumstances of politics require virtue
[Amit Varma]: to be cast aside. Does that mean that there is no cause for hope in Indian politics? That's
[Amit Varma]: usually my default position. But at the end of recording the episode you are about to
[Amit Varma]: listen to, I had reason to be a little less cynical. I hope you are as inspired as I was
[Amit Varma]: at the end of it.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Bharma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen. My guest today is J.P. Narayan, founder of the Lok
[Amit Varma]: Satta movement, a man who joined the IAS in the late 70s for the right reasons, and then
[Amit Varma]: left the civil services to start a political movement where he spearheaded many different
[Amit Varma]: reforms designed to make our country a better place. I'm recording this intro a week after
[Amit Varma]: my conversation with him in Hyderabad, and he's not in the room. So I don't run the risk
[Amit Varma]: of embarrassing him when I say that he is one of the people I most admire in modern
[Amit Varma]: India. J.P. is a rare public intellectual who, instead of complaining from the comfort
[Amit Varma]: of his armchair, as so many of us do, jumped into the rough and tumble of Indian politics
[Amit Varma]: to try and change the system from within. His journey in Indian politics has been fascinating,
[Amit Varma]: and every time I speak to him, I feel like my brain is expanding and my understanding
[Amit Varma]: of the world is so much better. J.P. was a guest on episode 50 of The Seen and the Unseen
[Amit Varma]: almost two years ago, and I'm glad I got the chance to sit down with him again to take
[Amit Varma]: a wider, more discursive look at his journey in Indian politics. Before we get to that
[Amit Varma]: conversation though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Like me, are you someone who loves fine art, but can't really afford to have paintings
[Amit Varma]: by the artists you like hanging on your walls? Well, worry no more. Head on over to Indiancolors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Indian Colors is a company that licenses images of the finest modern art from some of the
[Amit Varma]: best artists in India, and adapts them into objects of everyday use. These include wearable
[Amit Varma]: art, like stoles and shrugs, home decor like cushion covers and table runners, and accessories
[Amit Varma]: like tote bags. This allows art lovers to actually get fine art into their homes at
[Amit Varma]: an accessible price, and artists get royalties on sales, just like authors do. What's more,
[Amit Varma]: Indian Colors now has an exciting range of new products, including fridge magnets with
[Amit Varma]: some stunning motifs, and salad bowls and platters made of mango wood. Their artists
[Amit Varma]: include luminaries like Babu Xavier, Vazvo X Vazvo, Brinda Miller, Dilip Sharma, Shruti
[Amit Varma]: Nelson, and Pradeep Mishra. They accept bulk orders for corporate and festival gifting,
[Amit Varma]: but even if you want to buy just for yourself or a friend, head on over to Indiancolors.com.
[Amit Varma]: That's colors with an O-U. And if you want a 20% discount, apply the code IVM20. That's
[Amit Varma]: IVM for IVM podcast, IVM20 for a 20% discount at Indiancolors.com.
[Guest]: JP, welcome to the scene in the unseen. Thank you, Amit. My pleasure to be with you. The
[Amit Varma]: last time we spoke almost a couple of years back in episode 50 of the scene in the unseen,
[Amit Varma]: in fact, and I was glad that I had someone like you to bring that number up. It was a
[Amit Varma]: very different show. I did much shorter conversations, our conversation was something like 40 minutes
[Amit Varma]: over a phone. And, you know, over a period of time, the show has evolved to much longer,
[Amit Varma]: discursive, relaxed conversation. So I want to, you know, start this off, not by, you
[Amit Varma]: know, asking you the typical questions everyone will ask you about Indian politics, and where
[Amit Varma]: are we and so on and so forth. But tell me something about your personal journey. Like
[Amit Varma]: where did you grow up? Where was your childhood? What was that like?
[Guest]: Amit, first of all, it's amazing to me that you could actually have a podcast running
[Guest]: into a couple of hours and a very relaxed conversation because in this time and age,
[Guest]: everybody tells you that people have no patience beyond 10 seconds. So it's actually quite
[Guest]: stunning to me that something like this is working and I must congratulate you on the
[Guest]: team. My journey is pretty normal, very ordinary. I grew up in a village. My parents were in
[Guest]: Maharashtra. My father was engaged in the railways in a small little town in Maharashtra.
[Guest]: But because we're of Telugu speaking origin, my parents decided to send me to my mother's
[Guest]: village, where there was a school. My father's village didn't have a school, didn't have
[Guest]: a high school. So I think I studied there for eight years, though I joined in class
[Guest]: one and some early promotions and all that. So my whole universe at the time was that
[Guest]: village and the school and what little you learn from the school textbooks. Beyond that,
[Guest]: I don't think I had any idea what was happening. Maybe one knew the name of the chief minister
[Guest]: or education minister, but what it meant also, I don't think I really understood. The normal
[Guest]: talk about freedom struggle, very panegyric kind of thing, you know, we read in textbooks
[Guest]: and stuff like that. And some notions of patriotism without understanding what it really means.
[Guest]: I suppose mostly idolatrous patriotism, Bharat Mata kind of a thing. Then I went to a Jesuit
[Guest]: college for plus two, what we call college in this part of the country. After 10th grade,
[Guest]: you have to do two years of plus two course. That was a Jesuit college in Vijayawada, a
[Guest]: neighboring town, a significant town, not obviously not a big city, but a significant
[Guest]: town for us, a big city in those days. That college opened up my eyes quite a bit because
[Guest]: you're for the first time exposed to people from all over the Telugu land, some even from
[Guest]: other states. I remember some friends from Kerala and quite a few from Hyderabad and
[Guest]: elsewhere. So your world is a little wider, beginning to understand what the world is
[Guest]: like. At the age of 13, I was there for two, two and a half years because I did two years
[Guest]: course. And then before joining medicine, I continued because there was a delay in admission.
[Guest]: Then medical school, again, another town quite close within another 20, 30 kilometers from
[Guest]: there. Probably at the age of about 16 or so, my world began to open up. So it's curious
[Guest]: that now you have this podcast. I have great fascination for radio because much of my young
[Guest]: adult life was spent on radio. I listened to BBC probably about eight to 10 hours a
[Guest]: day. This was back in the village or when you were in the college. Once I went to college,
[Guest]: maybe once I was about 16 years of age or 15 years of age, I procured a transistor radio
[Guest]: and then I listened. In fact, almost everything that I knew about the world, I picked up from
[Guest]: the BBC, BBC radio in those days. Probably there was a time and there was nothing that
[Guest]: happened anywhere in the world that I did not know within half an hour because I was
[Guest]: listening every half hour, every hour, all kinds of programs. And it was an amazing experience.
[Guest]: The least costly experience to get some modicum of understanding of what's happening. 72 American
[Guest]: presidential elections I remember I followed very closely. Every single state, the primaries
[Guest]: and then the election, et cetera. Then the Watergate, blow by blow. On an hourly basis,
[Guest]: I knew what was happening. Again, thanks to BBC. Around the same time, if you recall in
[Guest]: the seventies, the anti-corruption movement in India, some amount of unrest and anger
[Guest]: from the youth, because we already finished about 25 years of freedom. There was some
[Guest]: amount of frustration creeping in and therefore Gujarat and then JP's movement in Bihar then
[Guest]: spread to the whole country. I was one of those hundreds of thousands of Indians, young
[Guest]: Indians, deeply impacted by that. Then emergency came again. I was following Allahabad high
[Guest]: court proceedings, blow by blow. So probably most of my life was about what's happening
[Guest]: around me rather than my medical education or something that I was paying enough attention
[Guest]: to be able to understand what the profession is about and acquire some skills. But basically
[Guest]: it was about the world. Emergency changed life. Many of us, for me, certainly, I was
[Guest]: angered. I was deeply disappointed and I was rebellious. How old were you then? 1975, I
[Guest]: was 19 years old, 19 years old. And I very vocally opposed emergency. Wherever there
[Guest]: was an opportunity, extremely vocally I opposed emergency. And I led some small teams of protest,
[Guest]: not on the street. I was never for street marches and stuff like that, but going to
[Guest]: the officials and giving a signed petition and that sort of a thing. Apparently, I didn't
[Guest]: know at that time, I knew later, I was kept under surveillance. They felt I was sufficient
[Guest]: nuisance to be able to keep track of me. But I was pretty inconsequential. And therefore
[Guest]: there was no reason to arrest me. So I was somewhere in between. I got to know about
[Guest]: that later when I got into the civil services, because there was a delay in the invitation
[Guest]: to join the National Academy. The results were published and all that. I got a pretty
[Guest]: decent position. I was surprised. I got to know later because the police clearance took
[Guest]: time because of the surveillance earlier. Then after I finished medicine, medicine of
[Guest]: course is a different world altogether. Therefore, you have a, you acquire an understanding of
[Guest]: the society as it is, because the sickness and the causes of sickness, not everything
[Guest]: is really medical. It's actually more about the way we structured our society, your drinking
[Guest]: water, your sanitation, your mosquito control, your infections, and so on and so forth, your
[Guest]: immunization, so on and so forth. That deepened the perception about the country and its governance.
[Guest]: First emergency, there was so much affiliation followed by very quick dejection. That's when
[Guest]: somebody suggested to me, why don't you join the civil services? You're very anguished.
[Guest]: You're obviously not looking for a traditional career as a doctor. You're worried about the
[Guest]: country. Just then, doctors were allowed to join the civil services. Until that time,
[Guest]: doctors are prohibited for some strange reason in this country. Who knows what the reasons
[Guest]: are? I mean, it doesn't have to be very logical, but they simply said doctors are banned. But
[Guest]: the ban was lifted. Then I joined the civil service. But by the time, I think I was pretty
[Guest]: clear what my goal in life is. Not a career, not a job, but an opportunity to actually
[Guest]: try and make the democracy work the way it should. Because those years, between 1973
[Guest]: and 1977, let us say, or maybe even post 77, 78, 79, because until we understood the crisis
[Guest]: after Janata's success, I don't think I understood the nature of governance crisis. Otherwise,
[Guest]: I thought Indira Gandhi was the problem. Once she's removed and Janata came to power, things
[Guest]: would be fantastic. That was the notion. So I say, I suppose I also had to see the failure
[Guest]: of Janata to understand it's a deeper crisis than an individual. So since then, I've been
[Guest]: pretty clear that we have to make our democracy work and we can make it work if we really
[Guest]: design it a little better. And all my life in government and out of government has been
[Amit Varma]: a quest for that.
[Amit Varma]: You know, there's this famous essay by the philosopher Thomas Nagel on with the title
[Amit Varma]: of something like what is it like to be a bat, where he essentially postulates that
[Amit Varma]: a bat experiences the world so differently from human beings, in terms of using echolocation
[Amit Varma]: instead of sight, and so on and so forth, that we cannot possibly get inside the head
[Amit Varma]: of a bat, it is impossible to understand that. And just thinking aloud, you know, when you
[Amit Varma]: were talking of sort of growing up in your village, and when I even look back at myself
[Amit Varma]: growing up in the 1980s, and so on in relatively privileged circumstances, it strikes me that
[Amit Varma]: young people of today can have no possible conception of the influences that young people
[Amit Varma]: of today can access all the knowledge in the world, they get information from various sources,
[Amit Varma]: there is so much culture coming at them, everything is accessible. When I was growing up in the
[Amit Varma]: 80s, you know, if you wanted specific kinds of international music, you had very little
[Amit Varma]: available to you, you had to, I mean, just getting a mixtape of the music you wanted
[Amit Varma]: was such a remarkable personal triumph, and a triumph of discovery. And in your case,
[Amit Varma]: it's you know, you kind of grow up in a village, and then you go to medical college, but you
[Amit Varma]: have access to the BBC, and there's a sort of a world of information. And it just strikes
[Amit Varma]: me how we are shaped by the contingency of the influences that are available to us. And
[Amit Varma]: it then strikes me that at a wider level, you know, even our society and politics is
[Amit Varma]: perhaps changed by this, because I imagine not everyone in your generation is sort of
[Amit Varma]: listening to the BBC or has a kind of wonkish interest in American politics that you do,
[Amit Varma]: and therefore, that sort of broader interest. So I imagine in that sense, you were an outlier.
[Amit Varma]: Can you tell me a little bit about what are the things that young people were into in
[Amit Varma]: those days? Where did they get the influences from? Were there political instincts, the
[Amit Varma]: typical tribal or communitarian instincts that you get from around you? Was there sort
[Amit Varma]: of deeper engagement? Where do you get your ideas from?
[Guest]: I think there were several strands, if I may conjecture. One is the kind of thing, very
[Guest]: traditional kind of thing, freedom struggle, romantic notions of the nation and Bharat
[Guest]: Mata and very romantic idealism without any deep understanding and so on and so forth,
[Guest]: without any exposure. The second is people with slightly more exposed background in cities
[Guest]: and so on and so forth with greater understanding of economic activity. I think by the time
[Guest]: there was a beginning of anger against socialism, just the beginning. It didn't get mature because
[Guest]: even Lok Naik, JP, all his demands were to make socialism work better. It was not really
[Guest]: about the role of the state clearly defined and so on and so forth. But I could see at
[Guest]: least in my medical school, quite a few. And at the time, because I was not exposed to
[Guest]: that and I didn't understand enough, I was both curious and surprised, because that was
[Guest]: heterodox at the time. The third is a strong ideological thing, right
[Guest]: or wrong. The leftist movement had a profound impact on the psyche. Lots of discussions,
[Guest]: literature, debates, the media, and many colleges had that impact too, sometimes with some understanding,
[Guest]: sometimes without much understanding, sometimes tribalism, sometimes based on ideas. Then
[Guest]: at a global level, Vietnam War during my early youth was a profound influence. It's very
[Guest]: difficult for people of this generation to even contemplate that it could sway so many
[Guest]: people. I remember when Haiphong blockade was ordered by Nixon. I thought that was the
[Guest]: end of the world. I was shaken beyond belief. I was horrified that something like that could
[Guest]: happen. I remember some of my seniors in medical school laughing at me and know because of
[Guest]: my very apoplectic concern, things like that. So that also had some impact. But at least
[Guest]: people of a certain background, the kids who are doing academically reasonably well, etc.
[Guest]: There was also this relentless focus on their own professional skills and equipping themselves
[Guest]: with knowledge. And what I find is, despite the obvious deprivation at the time, the kids
[Guest]: then were far more confident about the future, which is amazing. With so few opportunities,
[Guest]: there was no deep seated insecurity. Whereas today with all the opportunities, I actually
[Guest]: sense a lot more insecurity and a lot more propensity for depression and some disquiet
[Guest]: about the future, which is actually pretty surprising. And of course, in those days,
[Guest]: the only pastime for my generation was films. Apart from reading books, I used to read a
[Guest]: book a day, some stage of life, all kinds of books, no book a day, my book in two days
[Guest]: was the norm in those days. No, I was so hungry. I was waking up for all the lost time and
[Guest]: I didn't couldn't read much. But that apart only films. Whereas today, I think one disadvantage
[Guest]: that this generation suffers is that there are so many impulses, so many stimuli, that
[Guest]: it's very hard to focus. Your mind cannot be consistently focused on things that really
[Guest]: matter at least in your own mind. But that apart, I don't think that when we grew up,
[Guest]: we felt there was any sense of deprivation. It's only retrospective, when you look back,
[Guest]: you realize, no, my God, we actually endured all that.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, in fact, one of my friends who was a guest on the show, Suyash Rai, a political
[Amit Varma]: scientist in Delhi, he once theorized that people in the first century AD were much happier
[Amit Varma]: than we are today, to which my response was, how is that possible? There were no smartphones,
[Amit Varma]: there was no air conditioning, how could they be happier, but I guess that's subjective.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you were speaking of reading and you know, like reading a book a day and so
[Amit Varma]: on, something that you know, I also kind of try to do. And I keep proselytizing the importance
[Amit Varma]: of reading. So I once wrote this column called the Aankho Dekhi Prime Minister. And that
[Amit Varma]: was based on something a friend of Narendra Modi told me about him. And the anecdote was,
[Amit Varma]: she mentioned how she was a personal friend of Mr. Modi and how she was once sitting with
[Amit Varma]: Mr. Modi at his house, when he was CM of Gujarat. And he was relating this anecdote about how
[Amit Varma]: when he was a kid, his mother was ill. And he went to turn on the fan because she felt
[Amit Varma]: very hot and he flicked the switch on and the fan did not come on because there was
[Amit Varma]: no electricity. And as Modi related the story, his eyes welled up with tears. And the point
[Amit Varma]: my friend was making was that his view of the world, according to her was very experiential,
[Amit Varma]: because he had experienced that lack of electricity and therefore the lack of governance. He then
[Amit Varma]: made it a priority when he came to power to, for example, get power all through Gujarat,
[Amit Varma]: because he understood that. And in her view, his view of politics is very experiential.
[Amit Varma]: So things that he can experience directly like roads are important. Power is important.
[Amit Varma]: He tries to do cleanliness is important. He tries to do things about that. But a lot of
[Amit Varma]: the business of governance of running an economy rely on abstract concepts that you cannot
[Amit Varma]: experience, like spontaneous order, like, you know, the positive sumness of things,
[Amit Varma]: which is very unintuitive. And therefore, my point was that you have to continuously
[Amit Varma]: read to expand your knowledge of the world, because ultimately, we make sense of the world
[Amit Varma]: by building narratives about it by joining dots, the more dots we have, the clearer our
[Amit Varma]: pictures. And it seems to me the only way we can accumulate those dots is by reading
[Amit Varma]: not by watching news television or, you know, talking to people on Twitter. So in your experience
[Amit Varma]: through your career, not just in politics, but in the IAS, and so on, do people read
[Amit Varma]: like other understandings of the world ossified from an early age into whatever is received
[Amit Varma]: wisdom or whatever little scraps they might experience, which caused and I mean, do people
[Amit Varma]: read and would you even say that that's a fundamental problem that people don't read
[Guest]: enough?
[Guest]: It's interesting what you say about Mr. Narendra Modi. Each of us, we will learn about the
[Guest]: world in the early days, only through experience, a child does it. I remember my stupid days,
[Guest]: you know, when I, I didn't have electricity in my home where I grew up with an old aunt
[Guest]: of mine, childhood widow. Again, these are important influences that shape your mind
[Guest]: that a child could be married and she could be a widow and she refused to remarry. You
[Guest]: understand our society a lot more because it's very real, it's personal. So in order
[Guest]: to understand what electric shock was, I kept hearing about it. I didn't know what it was.
[Guest]: I actually put my finger in that socket and then asked these chaps to switch it on. And
[Guest]: I felt I was shaken. I didn't know it was a shock. How stupid it is. If I have to learn
[Guest]: everything that way, then I think mankind would be particularly tribal. Therefore, this
[Guest]: Prajaksha Pramana as our, our own tradition says this experiential thing, well, it's important.
[Guest]: Obviously the world grew and became sophisticated and there are so many complex social interactions
[Guest]: and economic interactions because of many other Pramanas. You learn from other's experience.
[Guest]: That is what humanity is about. An animal learns only from its own experience. Mankind,
[Guest]: because the gift of language, gift of speech, we have the capacity to learn from other's
[Guest]: experience and also pass it on to the next generation. Without that, there's no intellectual
[Guest]: evolution. There's no economic growth. There's no social evolution. Sadly in our country,
[Guest]: in a substantial measure, you cannot generalize, obviously, there are many, many exceptions.
[Guest]: Education in an insecure society is seen as a passport to employment or some kind of an
[Guest]: economic prospect. And many, many people after they have arrived, quote unquote, you've got
[Guest]: into IAS, for instance, or you're doing well in a business or a profession or something
[Guest]: else except to the extent that if it's an economically productive business, like, you
[Guest]: know, you have a medical doctor and you have to be up to date in order to be able to practice
[Guest]: better. Certainly doctors to that extent do try to update their knowledge. If you're a
[Guest]: child accountant and you have to understand what's happening on a day-to-day basis, the
[Guest]: laws and the procedures and so on and so forth. But beyond that, I think the capacity to learn
[Guest]: on a continuing basis and enrich yourself is significantly less in our society than
[Guest]: it should be. For a country of such tremendous depth and strength in our intellectual tradition,
[Guest]: I think this is a serious problem, even in the civil services. And the very lack of specialization,
[Guest]: the notion that almost anybody can do any job in this day and age, that the generalized
[Guest]: all-purpose service with some vague sense of common sense is enough to really administer
[Guest]: our very complex affairs in the modern world, is absurd. I remember I was appointed as MD
[Guest]: of an apex bank, two apex banks, actually, in the cooperative sector, long term and short
[Guest]: term, in the then combined state of Andhra Pradesh. I knew nothing about banking. Zero.
[Guest]: I was so embarrassed and ashamed. I spent quite a bit of time. Normally I had some humility.
[Guest]: I tried to learn always whenever I entered a new job from my predecessors. They told
[Guest]: me everything that they thought was relevant, including the cast of each of my senior staff
[Guest]: officers and who is good, who is not good, who is competent, who is corrupt, very valuable
[Guest]: and very accurate by and large. But they forgot to mention or they did not know the two most
[Guest]: important things for those banks at that point of time. The bank, when I joined, had 8% recovery
[Guest]: rate. Wow. It was after Chaudhary Devilal's loan waiver, 8% recovery rate. As a consequence,
[Guest]: the bank was the biggest defaulter in India's history to the apex bank, to the national
[Guest]: bank in a part. These are the two most important things for a chief executive to know. I became
[Guest]: the chief executive without knowing that. Now that the bank survived me is a miracle.
[Guest]: But this is our approach in general, perhaps in society and very definitely in governance
[Guest]: in a large measure. I don't think we are doing ourselves a great service by that approach.
[Amit Varma]: Speaking of reading, what was sort of like one question I often ask my guests is if they
[Amit Varma]: can name one or two or more books which changed the way they think about the world, like books
[Amit Varma]: which sort of gave you that kind of aha moment. Like for me, you know, those aha moments,
[Amit Varma]: you know, without referring to particular books was, for example, when I understood
[Amit Varma]: how natural selection works, which obviously then, you know, takes away the need to believe
[Amit Varma]: in God. So that's just an example of one kind of aha moment a person can have or how markets
[Amit Varma]: work or the wonder of spontaneous order and so on. What were your sort of formative aha
[Amit Varma]: moments and the books or thinkers who gave you those moments who influenced you? Undoubtedly,
[Guest]: the most influential thinkers, thinker early on in my life was Bertrand Russell. See, coming
[Guest]: from a village background and traditional, normal notions of God and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: Russell opened my eyes to this whole rational approach, this questioning and a very soothing,
[Guest]: soft, systematic approach to knowledge. To me, it's amazing the way I felt empowered,
[Amit Varma]: energized by Russell. Is his essay on atheism something you're thinking? A whole lot of
[Guest]: the whole lot of his work. I read several of his works at the time. So it's not one
[Guest]: particular work, but in general, quite a lot, including his biographies and autobiography
[Guest]: and so on and so forth. The other influences once, you know, I was grounded in some of
[Guest]: the basics, these things, some of them are fashions of the moment, which I later really
[Guest]: did not take seriously. For instance, now, those days, Albert Camus, kind of things,
[Guest]: but I don't think they left a profound impact on me, except Camus, the question of myth
[Guest]: of Sisyphus. Now, why? Why the hell are you doing what you're doing? Where do you have
[Guest]: to live? You have to find an answer in life, except that the right question and trying
[Guest]: to find your own answer. I don't think the impact has been very great. But as you said,
[Guest]: it's all evolutionary biology. And increasingly, I find that I'm attracted to anthropology,
[Guest]: how human society has evolved over a period of time. Now, one of the recent books that
[Guest]: impressed me most with the scholarship and insights is Jared Diamond's, Guns, Germs and
[Guest]: Steel, for instance, or even more recent impact would be somebody like Harare, who tried to
[Guest]: make us understand how complex relationships build complex organizations. So there are
[Guest]: many, many people. Increasingly, I find that I don't read fiction these days, almost never.
[Guest]: I read mostly fiction in those days when I read a book a day, both fiction and nonfiction.
[Guest]: But today, it's selective fiction, it has to be economics or governance related or philosophy
[Guest]: or anthropology or history, biography, things of that kind. And many of you know, as far
[Amit Varma]: as economics and politics are concerned, many of the received notions that you know, even
[Amit Varma]: I got in college, are kind of vaguely left liberal notions, which emphasize the role
[Amit Varma]: of the state and bringing about welfare and so on and so forth. At what point did you
[Amit Varma]: start thinking differently about economics and even politics, which is, you know, Indian
[Guest]: politics has such a focus on. It's a very good question. Economics, you know, many of
[Guest]: my generation, it's very difficult for young people today to understand how seduced we
[Guest]: were by, by the notion of the state being the center of the universe. Socialism, public
[Guest]: sector was natural things. But luckily, while I was also part of that brigade, which broadly
[Guest]: believed in the goodness of the state and public sector, I was never a Marxist. I don't
[Guest]: even know why probably there was too much of influence of Gandhiji's thinking and the
[Guest]: reverence for Gandhi in me to go for the Marxist doctrine, because the collectivization and
[Guest]: killing the individual spirit and of course, the violence that was necessary accompaniment
[Guest]: of the traditional Marxism, I think all those repel me a great deal. But I think the broad
[Guest]: tendency was a little pink. I think that changed dramatically when I became in 1984, Special
[Guest]: Officer of the Visakhapatnam Steel Project. It was then India's largest public sector
[Guest]: undertaking in terms of no investment 8000 crores, big money, then now it doesn't seem
[Guest]: to be a big money. Billion dollars is not a big money now. But a lot of money at that
[Guest]: time, 8000 crores, then it was probably three, $4 billion. But more important, given India's
[Guest]: kitty, it was a very big sum. Very soon, I realized that public sector in India is private
[Guest]: sector of those in public office. Wow. It has nothing to do with the people of the country,
[Guest]: the word public seduced us. Because words when we use them repetitively, they could
[Guest]: actually give a different meaning to your mind altogether different from what actually
[Guest]: is reality. So I was shaken. Since then, I've been an implacable supporter of the market,
[Guest]: wherever market works and competition and choice are possible. And they very clearly
[Guest]: defined limited all of the state, though I always understood the importance of the state.
[Guest]: Therefore, my whole life is about how to make the state work better. So I'm not one of those
[Guest]: would say the market offers all solutions. That's a silly notion. But I always had a
[Guest]: very clear notion. I remember in 1991, May on the fourth of May, the economist wrote
[Guest]: a brilliant 28 page essay on India, Clive Crook. Till date, I think it's probably the
[Guest]: most insightful, most seminal essay on India. In those days, economic reform did not come
[Guest]: yet. It came two, three months later. In those days, I made hundreds of copies. Those days
[Guest]: you had to Xerox it. There was no other means no internet, no nothing. We didn't hear this
[Guest]: expression. You sent links to people by taking physical Xerox. And I sent to prominent editors
[Guest]: owners of big newspapers, significant people in the country, hoping that they would actually
[Guest]: go through it and then rethink many of their assumptions. So that's the economic thing.
[Guest]: Since then, I've been absolutely clear. Unless we define the role of the state clearly, and
[Guest]: unless the state performs that role very well, efficiently and fairly, the economy will be
[Guest]: in shambles and society will be in shambles. And by expanding your remit and trying to
[Guest]: do everything and doing everything generally badly, we messed up our society and governance.
[Guest]: I have absolutely no doubt about it. About politics, I think it was the contrast between
[Guest]: what was happening in India and what happened in Nixon, Watergate trials. Relative to what
[Guest]: we were doing to ourselves, Nixon's follies were very marginal. Let's be a little practical
[Guest]: about it. But in those days, like many young people, idealistic, no room for any error,
[Guest]: you have to be absolutely correct and moral kind of a thing. Dogmatically virtuous. Exactly.
[Guest]: Dogmatically virtuous is the right expression. I, like many other people across the world,
[Guest]: I'm sure, genuinely believed that Nixon was a terrible creature. In retrospect, I actually
[Guest]: believe that minus Watergate, he was a pretty good president, a pretty good statesman too.
[Guest]: But anyway, at the time, the way the system dealt with the infractions of the mightiest
[Guest]: leader in the country, the whole process, because I was following now the congressional
[Guest]: hearings, et cetera, on radio, we had no access to TV and TV is not available in India for
[Guest]: most people, most of the time. And that versus what Mrs. Gandhi could do and get away with,
[Guest]: including finally the imposition of emergency and incarceration of 100,000 people, almost
[Guest]: every significant voice in the position. And the contrast was extraordinarily glaring to
[Guest]: me. And I remember in 74, just two days after Nixon resigned, I wrote an editorial for my
[Guest]: college magazine. I was the editor for the English section. Somebody showed it to me
[Guest]: the other day, some 40 years later. It's pretty much summarizes what I've been doing even
[Guest]: today, except that it was more breathless and more youthful and maybe a little bit more
[Guest]: certain. But it was pretty much known by that time. I was pretty clear what was happening.
[Guest]: When I look back, I realized that I am what I was in many ways, then.
[Amit Varma]: And it's interesting how the timelines work out where you describe your disillusionment
[Amit Varma]: with politics because of the emergency. But at the same time, you get into the ideas with
[Amit Varma]: a lot of idealism about changing the country. And my father was also an IAS officer and
[Amit Varma]: he describes to me he joined in the mid 60s, 63, 64 sometime around then. And he talks
[Amit Varma]: about how he joined with so much idealism and wanting to do good for the country, which
[Amit Varma]: I am, of course, skeptical of, because nowadays, we know what the bureaucracy is, and why people
[Amit Varma]: would want to join the IAS, what those incentives would be. But he kind of retained his idealism
[Amit Varma]: in a manner of speaking for much longer than one would have expected right to after retirement.
[Amit Varma]: But in your case, you've already spoken about like one aha moment where you realized that
[Amit Varma]: the public sector is actually the private sector of those in public office. What was
[Amit Varma]: a process of that idealism turning to cynicism? And therefore, at what point did you begin
[Amit Varma]: to think that I cannot make the change I want here, I have to get into politics.
[Guest]: My journey was not of that kind. I didn't join the IAS for a career. I joined for an
[Guest]: opportunity because even by that time, I remember vividly thinking actually, politics is not
[Guest]: an option. Now, when I look back, politics was a much better option than than it is today,
[Guest]: to be truthful. And yet, for my young mind, impressionable mind and seeing the way things
[Guest]: were happening, even by that time, if you're not a person of means or pedigree, and if
[Guest]: you want to stick to certain norms that you imposed on yourself, then political career
[Guest]: was not an option. I understood that. But here is an option where your ability and hard
[Guest]: work alone can take you don't require anybody's patronage. You don't require to compromise
[Guest]: your moral compass. And I could sense I didn't know, initially exactly what I was looking
[Guest]: for. But I knew it would afford me an immense opportunity to understand and to make a difference.
[Guest]: And I don't think I was disappointed. It certainly gave me a ringside seat and therefore a much
[Guest]: deeper understanding of our system and society while I worked. And many people believe that
[Guest]: my results were pretty out of the ordinary. And that's because the bar in India is so
[Guest]: low that almost anybody who applies himself or herself a little bit appears to be outstanding.
[Guest]: I was one of those lucky ones to get the public support and adulation and support of all political
[Guest]: parties. I must also be very fair. While I had my battles, I never took them seriously
[Guest]: in the sense that no, I can't really talk about my God, there was so much pressure on
[Guest]: me and therefore I had to, there's nothing heroic. I genuinely believe that across the
[Guest]: spectrum, while I had my battles, they all respected me and gave me space and, and therefore
[Guest]: I could achieve results which were generally regarded as way out of the ordinary and put
[Guest]: in place, no, actually, uh, implement some of my ideas in terms of people's empowerment
[Guest]: in terms of changing the way things work in terms of decentralization of power, designing
[Guest]: in a manner that incentives are altered, et cetera. All the ideas that I espouse now and
[Guest]: try and work on, I actually could implement wherever it's possible and with exceptional
[Guest]: results. So mine was not a case of cynicism or frustration on account of non-performance
[Guest]: or a sense that my hands and feet were tied. It was that I could see that when I'm lionized,
[Guest]: I could see my performance probably is about 20 or 30 on a scale of a hundred. And because
[Guest]: in this benighted country, the performance on an average is about five or six, this 20
[Guest]: or 30 is seen as outstanding. I was deeply troubled by that. And I used to say that to
[Guest]: the public repeatedly on a scale of a hundred, what I'm doing is 2025 and you're so happy
[Guest]: because now I used to use the expression, Alpa Santos, we are content with so little
[Guest]: because we don't realize how much more is possible and necessary unless we are habitually
[Guest]: able to do 70 or 80 in a scale of a hundred. Uh, all our individual heroism is of no consequence.
[Guest]: I was clear enough to understand that it was that that drove me. And once I understood
[Guest]: that in pretty early on in my, my career, I realized that the bigger change had to happen.
[Guest]: And as I developed that, that thinking and more or less to what required to happen, the
[Guest]: only question is when, not whether. So when I felt that, yes, I mean, I have learned something
[Guest]: that's not enough, but maybe now I have to actually move into a different area now to
[Guest]: try and make those changes happen. That's when I left. It's not cynicism at all.
[Amit Varma]: In one aspect, it seems to me that your drive in politics to make things better. And as
[Amit Varma]: the imperative that drives you to get into politics in the first place is more reminiscent
[Amit Varma]: of pre-independence politicians and politicians today, like one lamin that is often made by
[Amit Varma]: people is that look at the quality of leaders and statesmen that we had, uh, you know, in
[Amit Varma]: the thirties and forties and before that, and contrasted with what we have now. And
[Amit Varma]: I'd once written a column sort of speculating on why this could be the case. And it struck
[Amit Varma]: me that it, to a certain extent, it might boil down to incentives because if you had
[Amit Varma]: to take part in the freedom struggle at that time, you had virtually no chance of succeeding
[Amit Varma]: or gaining power in a meaningful sense, power over other people. You were driven only by
[Amit Varma]: ideals. You did it because it mattered to you in an idealistic sense, and you would
[Amit Varma]: sacrifice everything for that. You were not out there to make money or exploit other people.
[Amit Varma]: But those incentives have changed today. You know, power does corrupt even the lure of
[Amit Varma]: power corrupts power and money are in this constant sort of a circle that is vicious
[Amit Varma]: for the public, certainly. And people are driven by those kinds of wrong incentives
[Amit Varma]: and lust for power, which always, of course, corrodes character. And is that a structural
[Amit Varma]: flaw to which there is no solution? Because looking at our politics, it seems to me and
[Amit Varma]: I could be wrong, and this could be a naive observation, but it seems to me that you are
[Guest]: an exception. You're an outlier. I don't agree. There are three strands in this. The first
[Guest]: is I agree that there is an enormous lust for power in our society relative to many
[Guest]: other societies, because we've always been hierarchical society from a family to a nation
[Guest]: from caste system to operation of women. Though there are many virtues in a family, I admire
[Guest]: Indian family structure, but minus this, these negatives, but we are a hierarchical authoritarian
[Guest]: society intuitively. And therefore, this has also spread to the public domain. Therefore,
[Guest]: the lust for power in this country without a sense of purpose is perhaps extraordinary
[Guest]: in this country. I don't think there's another society that matches India in that lust for
[Guest]: power without purpose. That's a larger cultural problem. But barring that, the rest of your
[Guest]: hypothesis I don't think is valid. One, the politicians today are not evil or bad. I know
[Guest]: this is not a very fashionable statement, but I've been saying this for the past 30,
[Guest]: 40 years, not today. Many of them, in fact, most of them are pretty well-meaning people
[Guest]: who want to do something good. They also have this bug that they want glory and they want
[Guest]: recognition and there's nothing wrong with that. That ambition is not a terrible thing.
[Guest]: Actually, it's a good thing. But sadly, we created an institutional mechanism and incentive
[Guest]: structure where honesty and survival in public office is increasingly incompatible. Even
[Guest]: if individuals are honest, and there are even today, quite a few individuals in public office
[Guest]: who are pretty honest, institutionally, you cannot be honest and you cannot survive. Dr.
[Guest]: Manmohan Singh is personally honest. Narendra Modi is personally honest. Many others are
[Guest]: personally honest. But institutionally, you have to preserve the system of corruption
[Guest]: in order to survive in public office. It's a larger structure and institutional issue
[Guest]: where the victims of a vicious cycle, they're not really villains. Therefore, it will be
[Guest]: very sad and also counterproductive if we view them all as evil people who are out to
[Guest]: make something. And therefore, they entered public life. Because then the conclusion has
[Guest]: to be that every panchayat board member to the Prime Minister of India, they come only
[Guest]: with an evil intent. It's not true at all. There is a third dimension to it. We're looking
[Guest]: at only politics as the quest for power, not like Maharashtra, what's happening. This morning
[Guest]: you were telling me about what's happening. I was not aware because I don't watch TV news
[Amit Varma]: or newspapers. We're recording this on Saturday, November 23rd, when, you know, last night
[Amit Varma]: Uddhav Thackeray was supposed to be CM and this morning Mr. Fadnavis has been voted in.
[Guest]: I had such a hearty laughter that tears rolled down my cheeks. These are the unexpectedly
[Guest]: funny moments in life. But we are forgetting that there's a whole lot more to politics.
[Guest]: What you and I are doing is politics. You may not contest elections, you may not seek
[Guest]: power, but this politics is small p minus power struggle. I think there are thousands
[Guest]: of extraordinarily bright people and that number is increasing. I'm delighted to note
[Guest]: that who are deeply concerned about our public space and trying to do something. I've seen
[Guest]: in recent months, for instance, some exceptional people working in the field of education and
[Guest]: not so many in healthcare, but there are quite a few who are doing that. Some in rule of
[Guest]: law. This is politics. Politics are the best kind. And these are all imbued by the same
[Guest]: degree of idealism and same kind of idealism that inspired our freedom fighters. So I don't
[Guest]: think that there is a dearth of that. What is the problem is that they have no space
[Guest]: in impacting decision making. And apart from power struggle, for whatever reason, is it
[Guest]: because it's not easy or you chose not to be a part of the power struggle, you may not
[Guest]: want to be in power. That's perfectly all right. But when you have something to offer
[Guest]: to the country, if X is in power, that X must have the wisdom to utilize your talent and
[Guest]: the barriers between the state and the society must not be so rigid. We erected such barriers
[Guest]: that a third rate buffoon in government treats an exceptional genius who can actually make
[Guest]: a difference to the country as a mendicant, because this genius happens to go to the buffoon.
[Guest]: But to me, these people are doing politics of the right kind. So while I understand the
[Guest]: anger, the frustration, some amount of despair, it's now universal. And there's not one of
[Guest]: us, including me, who from time to time does not yield to that. I think there is a lot
[Amit Varma]: of hope.
[Amit Varma]: No, and that's a very illuminating distinction between electoral politics and the sort of
[Amit Varma]: politics that we are doing now, for example, by having this conversation. I didn't mean
[Amit Varma]: to imply that politicians today are evil necessarily to use that term, but merely that they're
[Amit Varma]: responding to incentives that drive their behavior in ways that outside of those incentives
[Amit Varma]: would be considered virtuous, and which brings me to this great dilemma of democracy, this
[Amit Varma]: interplay between money and power, where we know that listen to win elections, you need
[Amit Varma]: huge amounts of money, the money has to come from somewhere. Most often, it will come from
[Amit Varma]: interest groups, they will have a quid pro quo built into the system. If it is a specific
[Amit Varma]: industrialist, he will then want that once you come to power, you erect barriers to entry
[Amit Varma]: so that his market is protected, and so on and so forth. And of course, the problem of
[Amit Varma]: special interests in electoral politics is probably far worse in the US than it is here.
[Amit Varma]: Here, there are all kinds of, I think, other dynamic factors at play. But is this I mean,
[Amit Varma]: is there a democracy in the world where this is not a problem, where these sort of institutional
[Amit Varma]: incentives are in play, where the chief incentive for a politician always is listen, I need
[Amit Varma]: to get elected again. And therefore, I need money for my campaign. And therefore, I need
[Amit Varma]: to keep these people happy, not necessarily cater to what might be good governance at
[Amit Varma]: large. But you know, does this necessary interplay between money and power in a democracy, pervert
[Amit Varma]: our incentives, the incentives of politicians, so much that the kind of politics, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you and I would like to see is effectively, at least very unlikely, if not impossible.
[Guest]: You know, obviously, politics needs money, the moment you want to reach the people make
[Guest]: people think and communicate and compete, and study and research and come up with alternatives,
[Guest]: it costs money, no question about it. But that's different from the kind of incentives
[Guest]: that we have in play in this country. It's not true that most mature democracies really
[Guest]: play by those incentives, even America, which is the worst among the developed countries,
[Guest]: no, almost from the day you are elected, you have to again raise money for the next election,
[Guest]: but just legitimate money for legitimate campaign purposes. While it is sad, some of it could
[Guest]: have been avoided by more sensible approaches. There is no serious compromise in terms of
[Guest]: public interest, or in terms of ethics and morality. It's easy for us to say in America
[Guest]: also is like that, which is rubbish, we don't understand at all. Europe is altogether different.
[Guest]: They brought the cost very low level, very high quality of discourse and integrity in
[Guest]: public office, not having to worry about raising resources every day for the elected representatives
[Guest]: is pretty strong in that continent. So I don't think it's inevitable that democracy will
[Guest]: degenerate into collecting money and therefore compromising yourself. It is a systemic issue.
[Guest]: And the systems, the consequences are not always universally the same for the same system.
[Guest]: It depends on the kind of circumstances in which you created a system. I was because
[Guest]: no three days from today, we have the 70th anniversary of our constitution making Dr.
[Guest]: Ambedkar on the 25th of November 1949. He made a very significant speech. He said, Look,
[Guest]: there are three things required just because we made a constitution don't believe that
[Guest]: everything will be wonderful. The first he said, Let us give up the grammar of anarchy.
[Guest]: He actually coined use that expression, the grammar of anarchy, and use constitutional
[Guest]: methods of protest in order to pursue the economic and social goals that we have in
[Guest]: mind. The country ignored that. We continue to pretend as if you know, there are extra
[Guest]: constitutional methods of obstruction and abuse, which are pretty normal and, and it's
[Guest]: not merely a politician or a political party. We as a culture have never really gotten into
[Guest]: that Ambedkar's mode, what he advised. The second thing Ambedkar said, he said never
[Guest]: he quoted J.S. Mill, never lay your freedom at the feet of a tyrant, however great the
[Guest]: leader is. You have some restraint, don't have this extraordinary hero worship and learn
[Guest]: to hold them to account. We fail to do that. Our political parties, our family estates,
[Guest]: you see the leaders, even at an MLA or MP level, let alone a minister or a prime minister's
[Guest]: level, the kind of, you know, the hundreds of people thronging around them, even as in
[Guest]: your mind, you abuse them and you come back and criticize them harshly. This, this desperate
[Guest]: worship of power, not only seeking power for one's own self, but also worship of power.
[Guest]: We have never really kept it on a leash and therefore the parties decide your fate as
[Guest]: a human being in politics and therefore consequences follow. And the third, he said, we also have
[Guest]: to build a social democracy, particularly emphasize two things in a hierarchical society
[Guest]: where caste is always distinguished by birth, your superior and inferior, how to address
[Guest]: that and two, how to address the fraternity. One equality. The second is fraternity. See
[Guest]: all these groups, varied groups may be equal, may not be hierarchical, but that language
[Guest]: or region or religion, we all know the strife in the country from time to time, unless that
[Guest]: fraternity is brought systematically institutionally, there's a problem. But at the heart of it,
[Guest]: I'm absolutely certain that we have committed grave blunders and believing that vote and
[Guest]: the right to shout are enough to build a democracy. And there I lay the blame at the feet of all
[Guest]: the great men who built India because they were great men and women, leaders of great
[Guest]: honor and distinction. They assumed that without institutional mechanisms to ensure that degree
[Guest]: of conduct, it would automatically happen because anything else was unthinkable for
[Guest]: them. That was a mistake in not recognizing human nature anywhere in the world and therefore
[Guest]: not creating an institutional mechanism to make democracy work. In particular, low bureaucracy
[Guest]: in this country is unlike any other low bureaucracy anywhere in the world. It's so powerful, so
[Guest]: oppressive that the ordinary clock and garment is bigger than 90% of the people. We haven't
[Guest]: really paused to think about it, what it means and what are the consequences to a democracy
[Guest]: and governance and account of that. And as a result of this unaccountability, the people
[Guest]: always are mendicants. And of course, the socialist model we adopted early on, the scarcity
[Guest]: economy and the, and the license permit, Raj, and the begging the garment official for everything
[Guest]: that you are entitled to get as a human being in your life. That made it even worse. The
[Guest]: roles that reversed mendicant, the citizen became the mendicant, the employee who is a public servant
[Guest]: became the master. This lack of accountability is a first major brand. We haven't understood
[Guest]: just because power changed hands, it wouldn't change much. The second thing is we centralized
[Guest]: power abnormally. Despite Mahatma Gandhi's entreaties, we never created a link in people's
[Guest]: minds between the vote that they give and the consequences to their lives at a personal
[Guest]: and family level. So what is a celebration? All the great things we talk about Indian
[Guest]: democracy and voting, actually, they're the wrong things that we celebrate. There's so
[Guest]: much of wonder that this is rubbish. This is about our collective goals. There's nothing
[Guest]: very noble about it. It's very mundane. Water supply, electricity, the sewerage system,
[Guest]: the stormwater drainage, the school functioning for my kids, the local health center, or the
[Guest]: mosquito control so that I don't get dengue first sign of trouble. So this is very practical.
[Guest]: Instead of making it a practical issue, we made it a grand national issue. In the absence
[Guest]: of decentralization, people never understood the link between these two. We keep voting
[Guest]: each time with great fanfare and great hope and expectation, and we keep getting disappointed
[Guest]: almost on each occasion. The third is rule of law. On paper it is there, but in reality
[Guest]: it stinks. We all know that. Therefore, neither are the rulers held to account, both bureaucratic
[Guest]: and political, nor are we secure enough to believe that our rights will be enforced.
[Guest]: No matter how big the other fellow is, no matter how small I am, my rights will be enforced
[Guest]: and I will have my place in the sun. That confidence nobody in India has. And finally,
[Guest]: an electoral system wholly unsuited to our conditions. It's not per se bad, but if conditions
[Guest]: were right, it would have been okay. But over a period of time, because of the three failings
[Guest]: that I mentioned, electoral system became what by? Because in a poor country where the
[Guest]: delivery is weak for the reasons I mentioned, where rule of law is not there, accountability
[Guest]: is not there, people are mendicants, then you know, they're deeply dissatisfied and
[Guest]: we are poor and therefore something tangible that day, that money does matter. Not that
[Guest]: I vote necessarily for the fellow who gives money, but I do not vote any longer without
[Guest]: getting the money in my hand in the first place. So the entry barrier is created and
[Guest]: of course the corruption, so on and so forth. Then the freebies. Now, for instance, many
[Guest]: states where on the verge of a fiscal collapse, the kind of freebies, they've gone out of
[Guest]: control completely because the parties are desperate. And today I think it's safe to
[Guest]: say that political parties have come to a stage when if they say, we will not offer
[Guest]: any freebies, they almost certainly get defeated. So it's no longer blaming this part of that,
[Guest]: but there's a systemic issue. The third is divisions. It's easy in a diverse society
[Guest]: to fragment us and then fashion vote banks because of the primordial loyalties. These
[Guest]: are not unusual and these are not unexpected. In fact, there is a logical sequence. And
[Guest]: now I think we have to fix these first three things. And I think we have to change the
[Guest]: incentives and electoral system. That's the primary thing. It's not necessary at all for
[Guest]: a country to degenerate. I would make one postulate. It's a very bold one. You take
[Guest]: any country, make it a democracy. The way you made India a democracy without these four
[Guest]: things, particularly these three things, centralized power, don't have a real rule of law. Don't
[Guest]: deliver even the basic services to ordinary citizens in a poor society in general. I guarantee
[Guest]: you the consequences that followed in India are inevitable in the electoral system that
[Guest]: we have chosen. There's nothing unique about India. It is almost mathematical.
[Amit Varma]: There's a lot to unpack in this. And in fact, I'm, I'm looking forward to just sort of listening
[Amit Varma]: to this episode again and taking notes. I'll, before I sort of move on to my next question,
[Amit Varma]: I'll make four or five observations about what you just spoke about. One, I'll express
[Amit Varma]: a mild disagreement with your contention that America isn't all that bad when it comes to
[Amit Varma]: special interests. Because I think that while there aren't mostly any overt abuses of power
[Amit Varma]: like we see in India, I think at the level of public policy and economic policy, there
[Amit Varma]: is a lot of damage which is done, which kind of goes unseen. And to all my readers, I'd
[Amit Varma]: recommend this book by Jonathan Rauch called Government's End. I'll link it from the show
[Amit Varma]: notes and which was an eye opener for me in just understanding how much of the system
[Guest]: there is sort of ruled by a special interest. Let me briefly, I agree with you. If you take
[Guest]: gun control issue or the healthcare to particularly glaring issues, you can see the power of the
[Guest]: vested interests and the way the American Congress or the American system is responding.
[Guest]: Having said that, there are two broad points. That's the reason why I said there's a distinction.
[Guest]: There's no comparison between what we're doing and what they're doing to themselves. And
[Guest]: two, despite that, they use legal means to do foolish things like the healthcare system
[Guest]: or gun control. They're doing legally, unwisely because of vested interests, et cetera, et
[Guest]: cetera. It's not illegal things. And the moment you do something illegal, the system is strong
[Guest]: enough to hold you to account pretty quickly and pretty efficiently. In that sense, certainly
[Guest]: for a country of that extraordinary civilizational strength and ideas and wealth, I don't for
[Guest]: the life of me understand how they mess up healthcare so badly despite such expenditure,
[Guest]: how almost every other day you keep hearing about mass shootings. It doesn't make any
[Amit Varma]: sense to that extent. I completely agree with you. Yeah, I mean, I mean that distinction
[Amit Varma]: about legality, I don't know what to make of that because it seems to me that when you
[Amit Varma]: have given the state a monopoly on violence, and when as a people we have normalized the
[Amit Varma]: massive levels of coercion that we face on a daily basis, it might then be said that
[Amit Varma]: a lot of things which are wrong can easily be legal and therefore your guiding principles
[Amit Varma]: should be virtue rather than legality per se. But leaving that aside, I mean, that's
[Amit Varma]: another distinction. You also mentioned the three points Ambedkar raises. So my second
[Amit Varma]: observation is about the first of them. Ambedkar, of course, is one of the intellectuals I admired
[Amit Varma]: most in the 20th century, just an absolutely remarkable man beyond the familiar dimensions
[Amit Varma]: in which people talk about him. But you mentioned about how he implored Indian people to give
[Amit Varma]: up the grammar of anarchy. And this observation of mine is an aside not really related to
[Amit Varma]: the broader episode, but it strikes me that in that one instance, it seems very convenient
[Amit Varma]: to me where he says that, listen, we use the grammar of anarchy when protesting against
[Amit Varma]: our oppressors. But you may not use the grammar of anarchy when protesting against your oppressors.
[Guest]: I don't think it's a fair characterization. He's saying once you have the tools of vote
[Guest]: and free speech, you no longer have the right to use violence or obstructionism. We had
[Guest]: neither during the alien rule. I think that's the context. I completely am with Ambedkar
[Amit Varma]: on that.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And I mean, to be fair enough, the counter to that would be that people like Gokhale
[Amit Varma]: and Ranade and you know, the the Indian liberals who were really, in a sense, British liberals
[Amit Varma]: of the late 19th century, actually tried to work with the Empire in a constitutional way
[Amit Varma]: with petitions and so on and so forth. So the British could have argued that, hey, we
[Amit Varma]: have a process in place also, of course, they didn't have the vote and all of those things.
[Amit Varma]: So that point of Ambedkar is well taken that we build a constitutional democracy.
[Guest]: And I might even go a little beyond that and say something extremely controversial. I'm
[Guest]: sure I'm going to be attacked by many people. If we actually give ourselves a little bit
[Guest]: more chance for that evolution, particularly from 1937. 37 was when we really had self
[Guest]: governance in states with the Government of India Act of 1935. Two terrible things happened
[Guest]: that did, I think, immense and lasting damage to our country's democratic evolution. The
[Guest]: first was the Second World War. Mahatma Gandhi, because of political compulsions, in an act
[Guest]: of unwisdom, I dare say that he directed the Congress governments to resign. That's the
[Guest]: day when Jinnah called it the day of deliverance. It was a political compulsion. I understand
[Guest]: that. But I think it did immense damage to the country because the Congress governments
[Guest]: were doing an extremely good job because they were men of honor, irrespective of the structural
[Guest]: issues of the constitutional framework, they were actually doing trying to do the right
[Guest]: things to make people understand the meaning of democracy. Local governments could have
[Guest]: been institutionalized effectively. Many other things, you know, self-government, art of
[Guest]: self-governance would have slowly learned, though there was limited franchise, etc. That
[Guest]: was interrupted very rudely. And suddenly, without any further experience, we got one
[Guest]: day freedom, the flags changed, and we said we are a free country. We had no understanding
[Guest]: or experience. The 1942 made things even worse. The moment you indulge in this grammar of
[Guest]: anarchy, I don't know how moral it was in the first place. The Quit India Movement.
[Guest]: And the whole world was fighting against an extraordinarily dangerous tyrant, an idealist
[Guest]: idealist. He wanted to reshape the world in his vision. But a tremendous threat to humanity
[Guest]: as we understood the moral values as we understood that is one broader moral issue. But as a
[Guest]: practical issue, that perhaps made it even harder. So if we gave ourselves a little more
[Guest]: of that evolutionary thing, and gave our people a chance to understand the self-governance
[Guest]: and its limits and its possibilities, particularly the local governance and accountability, I
[Guest]: think our democratic transition would have been far better.
[Amit Varma]: My third observation is a dual observation, really. It's one about the point you made
[Amit Varma]: about how our great leaders, because they were great leaders, and they were sort of
[Amit Varma]: assuming that future leaders will be like them, did not build the constitutional safeguards
[Amit Varma]: that they should have and that a healthy democracy needs. And my observation here would be that
[Amit Varma]: again, as I postulated earlier, it's these leaders were great because of the incentives
[Amit Varma]: that brought them to where they were, they were not animated by a lust for power, when
[Amit Varma]: they joined the freedom movement, it was only out of idealism and wanting to do good for
[Amit Varma]: people. And those are not the sort of drives that would, you know, take someone into politics
[Amit Varma]: today or help them succeed. And perhaps they got carried away by that. And like you correctly
[Amit Varma]: said, assume that, you know, all we need is good leaders whom the people will duly elect
[Amit Varma]: and all will be well and that's not the case. The second point you made about the urge to
[Amit Varma]: decentralization and the centralization that we embedded in our constitution and our institutions.
[Amit Varma]: I did an interesting episode with the historian Gyan Prakash, who's written this very illuminating
[Amit Varma]: book called Emergency Chronicles. And his central thesis there is that, look, Indira
[Amit Varma]: Gandhi did not do anything illegal during the emergency. All the powers were powers
[Amit Varma]: granted to her by the constitution, the over centralization and all that. And Gyan's theory
[Amit Varma]: on that was that, look, at the time the framers of the constitution were sitting together
[Amit Varma]: in their room in Delhi, the country was erupting in violence all over. You know, they did not
[Amit Varma]: know that this country would stay together. They did not know like today with hindsight,
[Amit Varma]: we know that yeah, you know, the center did hold, but they did not know that. And therefore
[Amit Varma]: that urge to centralization is perhaps understandable, given the context and the contingency. And
[Amit Varma]: this is just just an observation, not my question. My question really then comes down to the
[Amit Varma]: whole issue of voter apathy. Like, why are we so apathetic? Why do we I mean, we vote
[Amit Varma]: in large numbers, but we almost assume that our vote won't really make a difference. It
[Amit Varma]: is almost like, you know, one friend of mine once speculated that this vote is an expressive
[Amit Varma]: vote, the same way that we go to watch our favorite football team and we cheer for them,
[Amit Varma]: the vote is we are expressing our tribal affiliation, so to say. But we almost seem to have assumed
[Amit Varma]: that our vote won't make a difference. And does this have something to do with the institutions
[Amit Varma]: that are in place where there is such a disconnect between power and accountability, especially
[Guest]: at the local level? Absolutely, absolutely. While you know, all our lives, you and I and
[Guest]: many of many like us have been urging people to exercise the right to vote without which
[Guest]: you cannot bring about change and civic duty, not only right, etc. It's absolutely true.
[Guest]: That's the only way you can bring about change. As I keep telling people, the only antidote
[Guest]: to the ills of a democracy is more democracy and better democracy, not sitting out, not
[Guest]: rejecting it is absurd. Having said that, the people at large are not entirely wrong
[Guest]: in coming to the sad conclusion that their vote does not seem to make a difference because
[Guest]: of centralization. Again, let me give a concrete example. Delhi, whether you subscribe to one
[Guest]: party or another, that's not material now. We're talking larger context. There are some
[Guest]: some signs of hope, some shoots. Why? Because the citizen of Delhi understood intuitively
[Guest]: that a vote in Delhi makes a difference to Delhi to at least some extent, real difference.
[Guest]: It may not make all the difference like rule of law. Other big things will not be changed.
[Guest]: But your local education, health care, basic service delivery, corruption free services,
[Guest]: other things are possible because Delhi has a situation where the chief executive of Delhi
[Guest]: is the most empowered mayor of India, much less empowered than any mayor anywhere in
[Guest]: the world. But because we don't have the strength of local governments by Indian standards,
[Guest]: chief minister of Delhi is the most empowered mayor of India. Therefore, some kind of a
[Guest]: change is possible. Mumbai, the same thing is not there. Mumbai actually is much more
[Guest]: vibrant as a city in my view. I hope it remains to be so, but I've known Mumbai for quite
[Guest]: some time. I love that city, the kind of citizen activism, the spirit of the community, the
[Guest]: voluntary sector, the civil society, and the general performance and trust from punctuality
[Guest]: to delivery. And yet, a voter in Mumbai does not feel that her vote makes a difference.
[Guest]: Because unless you change the whole of Maharashtra, you cannot change Mumbai. And given India's
[Guest]: complexity, it's much harder to make rural India recognize its own value of its own vote
[Guest]: and make it as a powerful tool to change. So that certainly if some people come to this
[Guest]: sad conclusion, I can understand. I don't accept that. I would urge them to still fight
[Guest]: that despair and then figure out the way changes will happen. Let me give another example.
[Guest]: What did Korean do? We are looking at democracy or institutions only as the union government,
[Guest]: state government, etc. But what did Korean do? The moment the incentives are properly
[Guest]: aligned, there is not a single cooperative society's member who does not believe that
[Guest]: his or her vote does not matter, his vote does not matter. They know their vote matters.
[Guest]: There's the same people of India, castridden, superstitious, poor, often illiterate and
[Guest]: all those things. And yet, the self interest is clearly manifest. I keep telling people
[Guest]: about the apartment complex where I live. After this, this recording, I go home and
[Guest]: suppose the elevator is not functioning. My elderly mother 84 years old, she is with me,
[Guest]: and she obviously cannot climb stairs because of arthritic and other problems. I'm not going
[Guest]: to keep quiet, I'll holler. Whoever is managing, I've chosen, we've all chosen. We're paying
[Guest]: monthly maintenance. I'm not going to keep quiet because my vote matters. Matters in
[Guest]: a way that I directly understand, not some romantic way of Bharat Mata. The elevator
[Guest]: is not functioning. The electricity outages are there. The parking is bad. Watch and what
[Guest]: is inadequate, water supply is interrupted. These things matter.
[Guest]: And these are simple things which everyone gets and experiences.
[Guest]: That's what I mean. When I said democracy is not about the noble and romantic things,
[Guest]: it's about simple and practical things which are collectively needed. And unless you bring
[Guest]: that connect, a vote does not become a very meaningful tool. That's what I mean. So the
[Guest]: answer is for heaven's sake, let people make decisions as long as their decisions don't
[Guest]: impact other people. If you decide in Mumbai or a part of Mumbai in Juhu, something, if
[Guest]: that decision is bad, as long as I'm not affected by the decision, I think you should have that
[Guest]: freedom to commit mistakes and learn from that. And we can certainly sit there and advise
[Guest]: them or you can hold them to account if something goes terribly wrong, but you cannot deny them
[Guest]: the decision making power because, and this again, a very controversial one that I'm saying,
[Guest]: I truly believe and I say it often that even a villain locally controlling the issues,
[Guest]: a local leader who is a villain is better than an angel who is a distant person.
[Guest]: The notion that you require some extraordinary people, Mahatma Gandhi like figures to govern
[Guest]: the destinies of a nation, somehow things will be okay, is a dangerous delusion.
[Amit Varma]: That's a very profound insight. And it's something that I often keep hopping on repeatedly is
[Amit Varma]: that you should have rules and institutions in place. So that even if the worst, most
[Amit Varma]: evil power hungry human being you can think of is in charge, he can't do much damage because
[Amit Varma]: there are enough checks and balances. And what you've said ties into that, that a local
[Amit Varma]: leader who is accountable immediately to his people and depends on them for his power will
[Amit Varma]: have to deliver, he might be evil, it doesn't matter, he has to get the job done. And you
[Amit Varma]: know, I did an old episode with Shruti Rajagopalan, which I'll again link from the show notes
[Amit Varma]: on urban governance. And what she laid out with great clarity in that was that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: taking Mumbai as an example, is that there is a disconnect between power and accountability,
[Amit Varma]: which is fatal in a democracy. The people you vote for your local corporators and councillors
[Amit Varma]: and so on don't really have much power to get much done. And the people who do have
[Amit Varma]: power, which is at the state level are not reliant on the urban vote, they are catering
[Amit Varma]: more to the rural vote banks. And therefore, who's looking after your interests. And this
[Amit Varma]: is something that I know, you know, the subject of federalism, government being as local as
[Amit Varma]: possible, I know is something that has been very close to your heart as well. And you
[Amit Varma]: know, you fought for it. And it strikes me and again, my lament and hopefully it's naive
[Amit Varma]: and too pessimistic, and things are not so bad. But my lament is that, look, the only
[Amit Varma]: people who can change this are the people who are incentivized against changing it,
[Amit Varma]: because obviously, they want to consolidate their own power. So why would you devolve
[Guest]: power away from yourself?
[Guest]: It's an extremely challenging question. You're totally right. I worked very hard at one stage,
[Guest]: became this close to getting the constitution amended 73rd, 74th amendments, those provisions,
[Guest]: in order to really make it a meaningful thing. And there was political executive was ready
[Guest]: and willing. And the political parties were ready and willing. But because of the fall
[Guest]: is not one. One other thing I realized in life is it's not always the evil man who stops
[Guest]: good things. Oftentimes, it's the unwise good man, who is actually a bigger enemy. Unwisdom
[Guest]: is greater challenge than dishonesty. I know it's not a fashionable thing to say, but in
[Guest]: my life time and again, I saw, uh, I know how to deal with a crook. Relatively speaking,
[Guest]: I don't know how to deal with an unwise person, particularly when he has this virtue of honesty.
[Guest]: Uh, so that didn't happen, but there are some levers. For instance, uh, the union is transferring
[Guest]: significant amount of resources to States. If you take all put together now, latest newspaper
[Guest]: accounts say that Delhi is trying to bring down the, the share of the States that we
[Guest]: will have to see the 15th finance commission, et cetera. But, um, something like 47.5% of
[Guest]: the total union budget is transferred to States, uh, either constitutional devolution or other
[Guest]: forms of transfer. Supposing some significant portion of it directly goes to the local garments
[Guest]: on a per capita basis. You're not increasing the cake. You are just interstate. You're
[Guest]: changing it. And to that extent, you will force the States to do all some of the responsibilities
[Guest]: like, you know, paying the salaries of teachers and schools. It's not that they seem to get
[Guest]: the money. They simply have to pay from their hands, but they also control the way the school
[Guest]: is managed or local health center, for instance. Uh, that's one easy way of empowering because
[Guest]: power follows money. The constitutionally we created a monster structure, the 73rd,
[Guest]: 74th amendments in the constitution are very well-meaning, but extremely unwise. They created
[Guest]: an over-structured underpowered local government system. So if the political consensus is there
[Guest]: to change that, it's wonderful. I would welcome it. As I said, I tried very hard at one stage,
[Guest]: but at the last moment we failed, but this is one way. Uh, the second way is in telling
[Guest]: on a recently an effort was made, at least urban local comments. No, in urban areas,
[Guest]: people are increasingly aware of their, their power and their deprivation. Both we are paying
[Guest]: taxes. We are sustaining ourselves to say state is not funding us. And yet even the
[Guest]: most basic services we're not getting that anger is there and urban areas, their problem
[Guest]: solvers. After all the best of India and urban areas, that's where money, that's where economy,
[Guest]: that's where talent is. Uh, this voice is heard. And if it's made politically an influential
[Guest]: voice, at least our cities and urban areas, perhaps you can have a beginning what's happening
[Guest]: in Delhi could happen elsewhere slowly. And therefore that also will politically transform
[Guest]: the country, not only in terms of governance and outcomes. So I think there are some possibilities
[Guest]: if our leaders are wise, I'm not saying empower blindly, hold them, take on very strongly,
[Guest]: have a strong independent ombudsman system. You control that and be ruthless. Though theoretically,
[Guest]: I mean, when you are doing all ugly things and there's no control, why should you bother
[Guest]: about them? But I wouldn't like to use that argument. My idea or anybody's idea of decentralization
[Guest]: is not decentralized corruption or abuse of power. It is to actually improve things. Therefore,
[Guest]: you have all the safeguards. I have no quarrel at all. As long as they are institutionally
[Guest]: independent of the political part of the government look like the local framework or something
[Guest]: else. So there are levers. It's hard because the constitutional injunctions are very, very
[Guest]: rigid and unwise. Change it. If you can take, for instance, German constitution in about
[Guest]: 53 words, very elegantly, the German constitution clearly outlines the independence and autonomy
[Guest]: of the local governments and the accountability and then leaves the rest of it to the local
[Guest]: statutes, the state of statutes. India is the only country in the world, the only country
[Guest]: in the world where the local government structure is elaborately prescribed in the constitution
[Guest]: of the federal government. It's absurd. It's so absurd that we're not able to even recognize
[Guest]: because we think it's normal. It's abnormal. In our medical textbooks, a textbook of pathology,
[Guest]: there was a great author called Boyd, very poetic. You know, the red blood cells of the
[Guest]: body, they're very important. They're the most numerous cells also of the body, very
[Guest]: tiny cells. And without that, you cannot survive. They are the ones that carry oxygen and so
[Guest]: on and so forth. The red blood cells of the body do not have nuclei. For students of biology,
[Guest]: a cell without a nucleus is like a human being without a brain. You cannot imagine that a
[Guest]: human being can actually survive or flourish without a brain. One look at Indian politics
[Guest]: and you'll be disabused of that notion. Sorry, I just had to say that. So Boyd says, we are
[Guest]: so used to the fact that the red blood cells have no nuclei that we cease to wonder about
[Guest]: it. So the absurdities, we're so used to them in our country. We think they're normal. They're
[Guest]: not normal. They're ridiculous. These are abnormal in the extreme. We'll take a quick
[Amit Varma]: commercial break. And when we come back, I want to talk with you about your personal
[Amit Varma]: political journey.
[Unknown]: Hey, everybody, welcome to another awesome week on the IBM podcast network. If you are
[Unknown]: not following us on social media, please make sure you do. And you know, it's about time
[Unknown]: that you did. So I mean, like we're IBM podcast on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram, go to
[Unknown]: whichever platform you prefer, or all three of them and click and follow. Also, you should
[Unknown]: check out our Instagram feed. We have a lot of interesting stuff going on over there peeks
[Unknown]: inside what's going on in the studio, polls, all kinds of cool stuff. So definitely come
[Unknown]: out there. I want to thank our sponsors this week, Gamblee, Intel and Storytel. Our sponsors
[Unknown]: make this stuff possible. And so please make sure that you shout out to them, let them
[Unknown]: know that you appreciate it. One more note before we get into talking about what went
[Unknown]: on in the network this week. And that was that I would appreciate deeply, deeply, deeply
[Unknown]: appreciate it. If you guys could go to ibmpodcast.com slash survey or go to the website and click
[Unknown]: on the survey heading. And what we're going to do is we're going to do another listener
[Unknown]: survey. We'd like to know a little bit more about you who's listening to us, why you're
[Unknown]: listening to us, what you want out of us all of that kind of stuff. So I mean, like, you
[Unknown]: know, it would be really, really helpful to us if we could get a little bit of more information
[Unknown]: from you guys about who you are. And that would help us kind of go out and talk to advertisers,
[Unknown]: which is again, as I mentioned earlier, how we get this thing going. So this week, we're
[Unknown]: premiering a new Hindi storytelling show is called top details and is hosted by Madhuri
[Unknown]: Advani. Madhuri narrates day to day stories and occurrences in women's lives across generations.
[Unknown]: This week, she questions the tea serving traditions in our house through the mother and daughter
[Unknown]: pair in a story called Chai Ki Cha. On Cyrus Says, Cyrus is joined by senior journalist
[Unknown]: and author Veer Sanghvi. He talks to Cyrus about his new book Game Changers and discusses
[Unknown]: the prominent personalities that have impacted India. They also touch upon election results
[Unknown]: and what the future might hold. On Storytellers and Storysellers, Vineet is joined by journalist
[Unknown]: Bhanush Kapal and co founder of Gully Gang Entertainment, Chaitanya Kataria. Together
[Unknown]: they talk about the hype around hip hop in India and its cultural impact. On Filter Coffee,
[Unknown]: Karthik is joined by NBA commentator and author Akshay Manwani. In the episode, Akshay expresses
[Unknown]: his passion for classic Indian cinema, especially the works of Saheer Ludhianvi and Nasir Hussain
[Unknown]: and discusses the evolution of the NBA in India. On Gannata Hathra, Dr. Ornith Shani
[Unknown]: joins Surya and Alok to discuss the first electoral rolls, the entrenchment of democracy
[Unknown]: in India and why despite trying times we must take heart. On The Empowering Series, Zarina
[Unknown]: is joined by Dr. Mithika Kannabar. They discuss the relationship between stress and addiction.
[Unknown]: On Postcards from Nowhere, Utsav talks about his six-month-long stay in Shanghai and how
[Unknown]: it changes outlook towards Chinese tourists. On Agla Station Adulthood, Ayushi and Ritarsha
[Unknown]: test each other by asking 20 questions. And with that, let's get you on with your show.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene and the unseen. I'm chatting with J.P. Narayan about the state
[Amit Varma]: of Indian politics and his own personal journey in politics. And, you know, we've kind of
[Amit Varma]: so far spent time talking about Indian politics in general, the nature of politics in general
[Amit Varma]: and a little bit of a personal journey. I want to now dovetail into your actual joining
[Amit Varma]: politics. Like, is that decision to leave the IAS and join politics something you mulled
[Amit Varma]: over a period of time? Or, you know, how was the process? What drove it?
[Guest]: I never thought of joining politics. I left IAS to build a movement. So politics came
[Guest]: more than 10 years later. 96, I left IAS, built looks at the movement and foundation
[Guest]: for democratic reforms. And then I was lucky to be involved in quite a few significant
[Guest]: changes in terms of governance reform, several constitutional amendments, several changes
[Guest]: in law and so on and so forth. At a certain stage, about 10 years after this, by the time
[Guest]: we became perhaps one of the more influential and one of the more respected movements in
[Guest]: the country in terms of governance reform, only because the field is very scarce now.
[Guest]: There are not many people. Again, as I said, the bar is very low. But then at one stage,
[Guest]: two things happen, at least two ideas. One is, perhaps with a certain amount of economic
[Guest]: reform and creeping prosperity, and media and internet and communications, perhaps a
[Guest]: significant section of the population, let's say about 10%, that was my assumption, 10%.
[Guest]: I'm now more and more aware of what is at stake, and they're willing to vote. According
[Guest]: to what they believe is right and looking into the future, rather than voting for who
[Guest]: will win in an electoral system, which always rewards the winner, and there are no second
[Guest]: prizes winner-take-all system. I sensed, or I felt, I assessed, wrongly as it turned out,
[Guest]: that 10% people in India are perhaps ready to vote for change, real change, on a sustained
[Guest]: basis. I was certain if 10% people are willing to vote for that on a sustained basis, the
[Guest]: political system will respond immediately. Whatever you say about our politicians and
[Guest]: political parties, they understand this, the way things are happening, electoral patterns,
[Guest]: and immediately they'll embrace the ideas. Real change does not happen because you with
[Guest]: one fell swoop destroyed the existing system. It happens because the political parties change
[Guest]: their behavior and their ideas to reflect the people's aspirations in order to get the
[Guest]: vote, and that's a perfectly legitimate incentive. So I felt if 10% is there for transformation
[Guest]: of our politics and governance, then the parties will respond. That was my expectation.
[Guest]: The second is, I also sensed that while some significant changes we could engineer, like
[Guest]: the electoral funding law of 2003 after the Halka scam, India has actually a pretty good
[Guest]: funding law. Most people don't realize it, but that simply is not enough because most
[Guest]: of our problem is not legitimate funding for campaigning. It is illegitimate funding for
[Guest]: wood-buying and many other dirty things. Similarly, the Right to Information Act, along with Erna
[Guest]: Roy, was instrumental in drafting that law, and the government of the day was willing
[Guest]: to do it, and therefore something would happen, and all the political parties were willing
[Guest]: to do it. The 91st Amendment, 97th Amendment, Cooperative Autonomy, 99th Amendment, the
[Guest]: National Judicial Commission, which the Supreme Court unwisely quashed it subsequently, the
[Guest]: local court's law, and several things we could engineer.
[Guest]: But when it came to the fundamental change required in the governance process, decentralization,
[Guest]: and I mentioned to you, for instance, how the hurdles ultimately blocked it, or electoral
[Guest]: system change, or rule of law change, the big changes, I felt that the political system
[Guest]: will not listen unless there are electoral consequences. As I said rightly, if it's going
[Guest]: to hurt them politically, why should they do it? What is the incentive? Other good things,
[Guest]: well, you may get some goodwill, and you may want to do some good things. As long as it
[Guest]: doesn't hurt you, you may want to do it. So, I felt if 10% people are willing to vote
[Guest]: for that, they realize it's actually hurtful to them if they don't come onto the bandwagon.
[Guest]: You see, these two things, which made us think that maybe we should look at a political platform
[Guest]: of the way it should be, the way it is not in India. So, after a very agonizing period,
[Guest]: because intuitively, I am not for partisan politics, I'm not suitable for that. My whole
[Guest]: approach, my life, my work, everybody knows about that, and even my articulation, not
[Guest]: about consensus building, how to reconcile rather than how to differentiate. Whereas
[Guest]: politics is about how to segment the market and take your share. And therefore, that hard
[Guest]: edge, that pretends of huge differences, making everything black and white. That is the nature
[Guest]: of politics world over. So, it is that that compelled us to join, to form a political
[Guest]: party. As it turned out, in urban India, particularly big cities, the 10% assessment was right.
[Guest]: In rural India, I think it's never beyond about a couple of percentage points. And my
[Guest]: assessment is that in the absence of local governments in urban India, if urban India
[Guest]: local governments are allowed this 10% would have become 30%. Or even a governing thing,
[Guest]: at least citizens get more involved in the field. See people once they shed the skepticism,
[Guest]: for instance, you know, when Lalu Yadav was holding sway for about 15 years in Bihar,
[Guest]: in one election, if you recall, Nitish Kumar got a significant vote, but not a maturity.
[Guest]: Once people realize that yes, we're actually much more numerically stronger than what we
[Guest]: thought. Next time when the chance came, they voted him to power very comfortably. Similar
[Guest]: thing in Delhi, if you recall, initially, they gave a significant percentage, but not
[Guest]: a winning margin. Once they realize that next time around, they go. So that's the way electoral
[Guest]: politics in the first past the post system they operate. Therefore, in big cities, if
[Guest]: you have self governing models, like in Delhi, that kind of a thing doesn't matter what name
[Guest]: of the platform, but basically, if it's an ethical and credible thing with a clear sense
[Guest]: of where we should go, people will respond. But rural India is nowhere near that because
[Guest]: there is this clientelism. If you recall, I mentioned something about the basic delivery
[Guest]: of services lacking in this country. Therefore, the ordinary people, they're desperate to
[Guest]: hold on to the coattails of somebody in politics, the local political workers, a machine. So
[Guest]: it's not merely wood buying that, of course, important. It's not really free base. It's
[Guest]: also that without them, you have no sense of survival, not that they are doing anything
[Guest]: very great, but at least they're giving you some access. And you cannot build an ethical
[Guest]: party with such a vast machine of thousands of workers five years around the year working.
[Guest]: It's not possible. Freedom struggle is possible. So they have to be necessarily mercenary in
[Guest]: some form or the other. Either somebody pays them or somebody allows them to make money
[Guest]: by misoperating the system, the police cases, the contracts and tenders, the land grab,
[Guest]: the ration shops, the transfers and postings of officials, petty contracts. This is the
[Guest]: way it operates, the whole system. That's why it's so hard to substitute an established
[Guest]: political party anywhere in the country. So because of this special problem in rural India,
[Guest]: we underestimated the magnitude of the challenge. And once we felt that this vote is not enough,
[Guest]: there's no path to reform, we decided that we will not invest our energy and time in
[Guest]: this. We'll work in a different way. But I think one day or the other, India must move
[Guest]: towards these political formations of a different kind or the major parties change in their
[Guest]: way and therefore giving space for these kind of people and these kinds of ideas. That's
[Guest]: the only way forward. You can't have a bloody revolution in the country. I don't believe
[Guest]: a million people marching in Delhi or Hyderabad or Mumbai will change the country. It may
[Guest]: become actually a grammar of anarchy. There are very few instances in human history where
[Guest]: a million people sitting actually change things for the better.
[Amit Varma]: So I have three observations slash questions here. Would it be fair to then characterize
[Amit Varma]: our political system in the absence of the rule of law, which as you correctly pointed
[Amit Varma]: out earlier, in most of the country, for most of the people, we don't have the rule of law
[Amit Varma]: in the absence of the rule of law. Are our political parties basically different mafias
[Amit Varma]: competing for the monopoly of violence that we give the state with its attendant consequences?
[Guest]: Mafias may be a strong word, very pejorative word, but certainly they're feudal fiefdoms.
[Guest]: They're personal jagirs. There's no doubt about it whatsoever. And my second observation
[Amit Varma]: is actually what you said about as politics gets more local voters will be more incentivized
[Amit Varma]: to, you know, to feel that they have a stake in the system. Extremely insightful, because
[Amit Varma]: like in public choice theory, there is this phrase rational ignorance, where voters tend
[Amit Varma]: to be apathetic, because every voter knows that at an individual level, his one vote
[Amit Varma]: doesn't matter. And therefore, when the reward is so low, why put in the hard work of educating
[Amit Varma]: yourself on what is at stake and understanding public policy and economics and is rational
[Amit Varma]: to be ignorant. But as you've just pointed out, that the more you increase the possibility
[Amit Varma]: of that vote actually mattering, which it will at a local level, more the incentive
[Amit Varma]: for him to be an informed citizen and actually take part in the democratic processes of the
[Guest]: country.
[Guest]: Absolutely. See, decentralization, obviously, you'll understand the consequences and a different
[Guest]: electoral system where everyone actually counts. And therefore, even if you are 10% or 15%,
[Guest]: that has a voice. And therefore, you know, if it is wasted, and you are Greens party
[Guest]: 30 years ago, where were they? One, 2% take Germany, for instance. But over time, as more
[Guest]: and more people were converted, right, wrong, I'm not going to ideologies and the philosophy,
[Guest]: it became a significant party. So that space, we're not giving ourselves in this country.
[Guest]: It's almost impossible to be outside the mainstream parties and be politically significant. Therefore,
[Guest]: we have to really look at alternate electoral system and tremendous decentralization of
[Guest]: power with accountability. Otherwise, this will be a very long and painful transition
[Guest]: with enormous cost to society, unquestionably within the country. And in terms of global
[Guest]: comparison, we will lose, we already lost dramatically, we will lose a lot, lot, lot
[Guest]: more.
[Amit Varma]: To come back to your journey in politics, you know, when I think of the political marketplace,
[Amit Varma]: I've always sort of held the view that it is naive to expect change at the supply end,
[Amit Varma]: you have to first the demand for change has to come from the demand end. And therefore,
[Amit Varma]: it is more if you want to change politics, you can only change it via the culture, like
[Amit Varma]: Andrew Breitbart once said, politics is downstream of culture. And to me, that sounds like a
[Amit Varma]: very profound truth. And it seems to me that you know, when you leave the IAS, you decide
[Amit Varma]: to start this movement. That's what you're trying to do. You're trying to influence the
[Amit Varma]: demand and you're trying to influence change the culture. So that more than the 10% of
[Amit Varma]: urban voters and the 2% of rural voters actually start fighting for good governance. But then
[Amit Varma]: at some point, you decide that this is not enough, and you actually enter the supply
[Amit Varma]: end yourself. So what prompted that change in that shift, so to say,
[Guest]: No, as I said, these two estimates one, an optimistic one, that no, maybe an opportunity
[Guest]: is now growing because of the economic growth a little bit and greater awareness and communications.
[Guest]: The other, a little bit of anger against the political system, which is not willing to
[Guest]: look at bigger changes. I think the combination of these two, probably one or two specifics
[Guest]: also might have contributed to that at a particular point of time. For instance, we were very
[Guest]: close to altering the electoral system. And the way I sell these changes to the political
[Guest]: parties and major leaders is not the country's good, because I don't think they really motivated
[Guest]: by that alone. I'm not saying they don't want it. I don't think that is enough motivation
[Guest]: for them. It is their own political future and survival that matters. So at the time,
[Guest]: the way I did was we did enormous research. We found that take the six largest states
[Guest]: of India, UP, Bihar, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, and Bengal, which account for 55%
[Guest]: of the looks of our seats. At that time, things have changed because BJP has expanded his
[Guest]: footprint in some of these states, which is actually against the trend. But at that time,
[Guest]: 10 years ago, in four and a half states, Congress and BJP were irrelevant. In one and a half
[Guest]: states, one state, Andhra Pradesh, where Congress was one of the dominant players, and Maharashtra,
[Guest]: where BJP was a significant player, not yet a dominant player. Today it became a dominant
[Guest]: player. They have space. And similarly, Congress in alliance with the NCP was a significant
[Guest]: player. Today it appears alliances have changed and nobody knows what happens. So we explained
[Guest]: to both the Congress and BJP why this happened. In a first-past-the-post system, once your
[Guest]: vote share comes below a certain threshold, people intuitively realize that a vote for
[Guest]: you does not mean the seats. And therefore, immediately the idea of wasted vote kicks
[Guest]: in. And therefore, very soon, that 25% vote becomes 5% vote. And therefore, the national
[Guest]: parties actually gain in a system where there's nothing like a wasted vote. Provided you have
[Guest]: some safeguards to ensure that there's not too much of fragmentation, caste-based parties,
[Guest]: there are ways of doing it. Reasonable threshold, rewarding the big party with extra seats and
[Guest]: all kinds of things. But incentives are dramatically altered. The reason why I am interested in
[Guest]: that is once a candidate has no incentive to buy the votes, and if I spend money, Amit
[Guest]: and many others along with me in the list will benefit, the incentive is no longer for
[Guest]: me to buy. Why should I spend my 20 crores in order to benefit Amit? Life doesn't work
[Guest]: that way. And the parties also, right now, they see a tremendous advantage in bringing
[Guest]: money back without any ability to govern or desire to govern well, because they are winnable.
[Guest]: Whereas tomorrow, it's the credibility of the person and overall respect that the panel
[Guest]: enjoys, the slate of candidates, that will give you the voting. Therefore, the way the
[Guest]: party thinks, the way the candidate thinks, these two will dramatically change. The way
[Guest]: the people think that, no, if I vote for Amit because of moral considerations, that vote
[Guest]: is wasted. And there's also most democratic voting in our system is tactical voting. Right.
[Guest]: I don't vote for the best candidate. I vote for the second worst candidate. Exactly. Because
[Guest]: my fear is if I vote for the right person, the very wrong person may actually come into
[Guest]: office. That's my God, I can't afford that. And we wanted to break that for whatever reason,
[Guest]: it almost came through, but it didn't happen. Maybe that's also a moment that sort of, you
[Guest]: know, generated this thinking because you were this close and it didn't happen. Damn
[Guest]: it. We have to persuade the political parties by more than mere logical persuasion, but
[Amit Varma]: by the vote, the fear of the water. So, you know, so when you as coming from as someone
[Amit Varma]: who's sort of new into politics and is coming from civil society, when you speak to politicians,
[Amit Varma]: when you entered that game where you're speaking to politicians and trying to convince them
[Amit Varma]: of policies and you know, we should do this and we should do that. Does the manner of
[Amit Varma]: your discourse changes? Like, do you have to tailor your arguments to their incentives?
[Guest]: What are those conversations? I speak exactly the way I'm speaking with you. No lies, no
[Guest]: deception, no big talk, nonjudgmental and with genuine respect, because I believe they
[Guest]: deserve genuine respect and a deep understanding and sympathy for the plight in which they
[Guest]: are, whether it's vote buying or the wrong kind of candidates. It's not because they're
[Guest]: bad. They have no choice. Now I'll give you two examples. In Andhra Pradesh, Mrs. Sonia
[Guest]: Gandhi and Congress Party at one stage decided that after Mr. Dr. Rajasekar Reddy's passing,
[Guest]: the son who wanted to be chief minister instantly, they felt it's not right. Let me at least
[Guest]: have some chance. You can, while they were all for dynastic politics, Congress are running
[Guest]: the opposite dynastic politics. They thought it was too, what should I say, too crass.
[Guest]: And therefore, they did what they thought was the right thing. They paid a humongous
[Guest]: price forever, possibly forever. In Karnataka, BJP asked Mr. Yadavirappa, then chief minister,
[Guest]: to resign on moral grounds. The party paid a humongous price. It was not forever because
[Guest]: Yadavirappa came back and BJP patched up and now again they're in power. So when the parties
[Guest]: do the right thing that you and I, all the moralists and intelligentsia want, the price
[Guest]: they pay is quite humongous. We must understand and sympathize and therefore create conditions
[Guest]: where doing the right thing is also not politically suicidal. You be respectful of their genuine
[Guest]: compulsions. And then while advancing an argument, while you are on the lookout for public interest
[Guest]: and persuade them on that, don't be stupid and ask them to commit harakiri. That is one
[Guest]: thing that tailoring, if it's required, it's not untruthful. It's not secret. It's not
[Guest]: some magical thing. It's open. But honestly, this is also an advantage for you. Like for
[Guest]: instance, if your vote share is below a certain threshold, to retain that, if you alter the
[Guest]: system, you actually benefit. Otherwise, in the long term, maybe you'll lose out. It's
[Guest]: a very honest argument. Why didn't it go through? This is the first time I'm stating it publicly.
[Guest]: At the time the UPA was in power, the communists leftist had about 64 or 65 seats collectively.
[Guest]: And if they wanted it, and they wanted it, communists always wanted a proportionality
[Guest]: system for instance. If they wanted it, that was the time because Congress party would
[Guest]: do anything to retain power. You know, the DNA of Congress, that is that once, you know,
[Guest]: Mr. P. V. Narasimha Rao said, Congress is a party with the promise of power. Those were
[Guest]: the days. But today, of course, BJP is the party with the promise of power. So that is
[Guest]: the DNA. Somehow bring some consciences, somehow do whatever it takes to stay in power, etc.
[Guest]: We persuaded the Congress party, very emphatically. I mean, they saw the data and they knew. BJP
[Guest]: at some level were interacting with people and they also understood. And at that time,
[Guest]: they were in disarray. Nobody expected Mr. Vajpayee's defeat in 2004. I didn't expect
[Guest]: it. I don't think many people really anticipated that. It was a shocker. So they were in disarray.
[Guest]: They also realized that no, something needs to be done. Then Mrs. Gandhi said, I'm completely
[Guest]: persuaded. I'm excited, actually. I understand the problem now and how to address this. And
[Guest]: after I don't want to go into too many details of the conversation, said, I'll talk to my
[Guest]: colleagues and get back. After a month, Mrs. Gandhi said, you know, our colleagues are
[Guest]: saying, Madam, we are in power, why bother about all this? Because you know, there's
[Guest]: a status quoism embedded in that party. The differentiator would have been the communists.
[Guest]: I pleaded with the communists, particularly CPM leadership, Prakash Karat, repeatedly,
[Guest]: repeatedly. Each time the response is we are completely in favor, but we will not raise
[Guest]: our voice for this. If Congress party is on board, publicly gives a statement in favor
[Guest]: of this and saying that we are going to do it, we want your support, then we will join
[Guest]: the bandwagon. I told them, look, it's a status quo is to set up. It will not happen that
[Guest]: it's a fundamental change, institutional change and incentives change. And you believe it's
[Guest]: right for the country, you believe it's good for your parties also. So please do it. They
[Guest]: chose not to do it. Why? I can only conjecture. And I'm reasonably confident that that is
[Guest]: a correct assessment. They wrongly wanted to use their political capital for other purposes,
[Guest]: stopping economic liberalization, WTO agreement, into American nuclear agreement, and many
[Guest]: other things. And they felt that by using this ammunition for this cause, they will
[Guest]: not have the ammunition left. I think it was a terrible strategic blunder. And of course,
[Guest]: they paid a humongous price. But I think the country is paying a humongous price.
[Amit Varma]: How would our politics have looked different if that had gone through?
[Guest]: Three things would happen. Number one, the kind of people who are entering the political
[Guest]: office now, why are they entering? They're not entering to be legislators. They're entering
[Guest]: to have a finger in the executive pie. And they're using money power, organizational
[Guest]: ability, and caste power as the levers. These are the three things that really are the determinants
[Guest]: of who gets the seat, whether it's BJP or Congress, some other party, doesn't matter.
[Guest]: These are the three broad things. Criminality is not always the consideration. We often
[Guest]: talk because we're angry with politicians, we talk of criminality. Even criminality,
[Guest]: when that background is there, it is because criminality brought the money power, organization,
[Guest]: and almost every criminal who became a significant politician, styled himself as a caste leader,
[Guest]: or sometimes a community leader, religious leader. So criminality is not the fundamental.
[Guest]: It is the other three things that happen along with criminality. And therefore, the incentives
[Guest]: are wrongly aligned. We're buying money, once you spend that kind of money, it takes us
[Guest]: so high. I mean, in some of the states like in the South and the West, 20-30 crores for
[Guest]: an assembly constituency. Even in the Northeast, for a Lok Sabha seat, sometimes 30-40 crores,
[Guest]: absurd amounts, obscene amounts, unheard of amounts anywhere in the world.
[Guest]: And you have to get an ROI somehow after that.
[Guest]: Otherwise, you have no choice. See, after spending that, you will not be elected, but
[Guest]: you are now in contention, serious, it's an entry fee. Now, once you have a proportionality
[Guest]: model, for instance, with a slate of candidates, and the party's success depends on the proportion
[Guest]: of votes you get, not who wins in a constituency, neither vote buying and money power of that
[Guest]: kind, nor the other highly misplaced policies in order to get another 200,000 votes.
[Guest]: For instance, in recent elections in several states, many parties very unwisely offered
[Guest]: that they will scrap the new pension scheme. You know, because the salaries, the pensions
[Guest]: are now outstripping salaries, industry pensions, and therefore, often you're getting much more
[Guest]: than your last salary drawn as pension, and your lifespans are expanding happily.
[Guest]: There's a stage where the future generations are forced to pay for the services in the
[Guest]: past. So quite wisely, the union government sat with all political parties and the state
[Guest]: governments and came up with a new pension program, which is necessary for the country.
[Guest]: But because you're afraid that you lose those 100,000 votes or 200,000 votes in a state,
[Guest]: in a first possible system, then their families are enough, maybe to put you this way or that
[Guest]: way, in the desperate gamble, they will not offer that this is the way the system operates
[Guest]: in a take all system. Here in the proportionality model, you're not worried about that.
[Guest]: And once the incentives for the political party and the candidate are dramatically altered,
[Guest]: and once the people realize that each vote counts, and therefore, I don't have to vote
[Guest]: for quote unquote winner, there's no winner. Each vote actually has a value in terms of
[Guest]: representation, it will be a significant change in the way things happen. That's not the only
[Guest]: way you can transform India right now, I don't think that's possible. Because when Mr. Narendra
[Guest]: Modi is winning everything that he fights, when a political party is dominant, and they're
[Guest]: getting disproportionate representation, as Congress did for a long time, there's no incentive
[Guest]: for them to switch over. Perhaps now, the model we have to think about is can we think
[Guest]: of clear separation of the executive and legislature, a direct direction of the leader because anyway,
[Guest]: people vote for Narendra Modi and for KCR and for Jagan or somebody, they're not voting
[Guest]: for a party in most of the cases. And therefore, you actually make it legally and institutionally
[Guest]: so so that some of the burdens that today's system imposes on the leaders, namely, how
[Guest]: can the fellow get elected in the constituency and therefore have all these qualities rather
[Guest]: than good representation. You depend on them for survival in office, any day they can bring
[Guest]: you down and therefore do their bidding, all the misgovernance, interference from court
[Guest]: cases to contracts to transfers to postings, you know, endemic all over the country. And
[Guest]: your ministerial positions are dependent only on the legislature. Therefore, everything
[Guest]: is about fighting for crumbs rather than looking for the best people to govern. And because
[Guest]: the legislators see local governments as a threat in a system where power is highly centralized
[Guest]: entrenched, you don't dare to empower local governments where tomorrow legislator does
[Guest]: not matter in that sense. And the people who want to legislate is actually go to local
[Guest]: governments and lead them if you empower local government, so the incentives will be altered.
[Guest]: So you have to figure out how to alter the incentives. And the levers of change you must
[Guest]: look at. And I believe there's a possibility now, let us see if that works. And I believe
[Guest]: some people are looking at that then you're running dispensation. And if that is true,
[Guest]: I think we must help them structure it properly and sell it well in the country and then make
[Guest]: change happen.
[Amit Varma]: So over your time in politics, I mean, this is obviously something that almost happened.
[Amit Varma]: But if you if you look back on your time in politics, what are the things you're proud
[Amit Varma]: of your triumphs, and some of them might well be silent, low key triumphs, which are not,
[Guest]: you know, publicly sort of hailed?
[Guest]: Let me expand this question to the larger public advocacy. First, a caveat in terms
[Guest]: of what we've been able to accomplish as a group, we probably are the biggest in the
[Guest]: country. That's because the bar is very low, and there's not much that's been accomplished.
[Guest]: But I'm always mindful that in the context of what needs to happen, what we accomplished
[Guest]: is still minuscule, though it's bigger than almost any other group, perhaps in the world
[Guest]: without political power. I mean, three constitutional amendments, seven or eight significant laws
[Guest]: and four or five major policy changes, including 2g spectrum license cancellation through court
[Guest]: intervention, disclosure of candidate details, law, local courts, law, etc, etc. And removing
[Guest]: the export ban on food grains, I don't understand what EDSC made us impose that ban, a removal
[Guest]: of trade barriers within the country, food grains, etc. I can go on and on. But in the
[Guest]: largest scheme, these are still minuscule. As a legislator, obviously, I could do some
[Guest]: things, more things to prevent damage from happening rather than making good happen,
[Guest]: because it's easier to prevent damage from happening. If you have a sufficiently strong
[Guest]: and credible voice, and they respect you, it's harder to actually make the ruling party
[Guest]: agree to do the right thing. So there's a clash. Therefore, when they tried to bring
[Guest]: in a terrible and draconian societies law, even British government during their time,
[Guest]: they had an extremely liberal law, single handedly, I could block it. I mean, they simply
[Guest]: did not know how to counter my opposition. I was a lone opponent on that. Several such
[Guest]: things I can cite, but the particular context in which I was a legislator in this state,
[Guest]: the state was really driven by this Andhra Telangana thing. And therefore, mine was one
[Guest]: of the few voices of sanity, trying to bring people together and reconcile conflicting
[Guest]: emotions. I don't think I succeeded. But I think that voice was loud and clear and widely
[Guest]: understood. And increasingly, that voice has greater credibility today. Because post those
[Guest]: incidents, people have both the states realize that that is what was required. And they simply
[Amit Varma]: were falling prey to to emotionalism.
[Amit Varma]: Speaking of sort of the landscape of Indian politics, it seems to me number one, that
[Amit Varma]: most parties are really extremely similar, that is in their economics, a very statist
[Amit Varma]: in as far as their approach towards society, it's often very dictated toward by identity
[Amit Varma]: and vote bank politics. And, you know, as Arun Shourie once famously said, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the NDA is UPA plus cow, and the Congress also has embraced the cow in various places.
[Amit Varma]: Given this, it would seem and also given the large number of people who don't actually
[Amit Varma]: vote, or who vote voter, it would also seem that there is scope for disruption. And in
[Amit Varma]: a sense, when you enter the electoral marketplace, you must have thought of perhaps being a disruptive
[Amit Varma]: influence and definitely whatever one thinks of the Aam Aadmi Party, I'm not a big fan,
[Amit Varma]: but whatever one thinks of them, what they did very successfully as political entrepreneurs,
[Amit Varma]: was it disrupted that marketplace and made that space for themselves, which is pretty
[Amit Varma]: remarkable, but that was in the local political market of Delhi. So in general, given that
[Amit Varma]: politics has become so ossified, that all the parties are just more of the same, do
[Amit Varma]: you think that there is scope for disruption? And if so, I mean, I know politics and the
[Amit Varma]: future are both story of unknown unknowns, and a week is a long time in politics, as
[Amit Varma]: is famously said, but what are the possible avenues through which such disruption can
[Guest]: come? If cities are empowered, like in Delhi, let's say Mumbai has a genuine self governance
[Guest]: and the mayor of Mumbai and the Council of Mumbai actually matter on their own. I'm absolutely
[Guest]: certain that something even bigger will happen in Mumbai, or Bengaluru, may not be on the
[Guest]: same scale, but Hyderabad and Chennai and others will also follow. But it's a big if
[Guest]: unfortunately, we are not giving ourselves that chance. Once I asked the then Prime Minister,
[Guest]: so can you name the name of mayor of Delhi? He could not, of course, I could not either.
[Guest]: Or Chennai or Bengaluru or Mumbai or something I said, then can you name the mayor of London
[Guest]: at the time, Boris Johnson was the mayor, the current Prime Minister, Mayor of New York,
[Guest]: New York, Bloomberg or somebody. Earlier, the current mix co-president was mayor. He
[Guest]: could name some of them. I said, aren't we ashamed? We know the names of mayors of other
[Guest]: cities in the rest of the world. In India, we don't know the mayor of a single city.
[Guest]: In 1924, some of the biggest names in India were leaders of local governments. Rajendra
[Guest]: Prasad in Patna, Jawaharlal Nehru, Chitranjan Das and later, Subhash Chandra Bose, Sardar
[Guest]: Vallabhbhai Patel. And even much earlier, in Salem, Chakravartin Rajagopalachari or
[Guest]: even before him, our own Prakasham Pantulu in Rajahmundry. So, you know, local governments
[Guest]: during British India were far more powerful and nurtured leadership than in independent
[Guest]: India. Actually, I feel ashamed to say this, but it is absolute truth. If that happens,
[Guest]: then there is a lever. In the absence of that, I think the cities can start shouting, making
[Guest]: their voice felt. If Mumbaikars say, I don't care if it's BJP or Shiv Sena and CP or Congress.
[Guest]: If you don't allow Mumbai to have self-government within reasonable limits, we are going to
[Guest]: vote against you. If that voice is felt strongly, I think there is an option, there is an option
[Guest]: but that means you have to overcome the primordial loyalties. I think parties will listen. At
[Guest]: the very least, you must start a framework for the big cities so that they can set the
[Guest]: trend. Barring that, as I mentioned to you earlier, if a well-meaning government, if
[Guest]: they have at least half wisdom, if they are at least fiscally empowered with adequate
[Guest]: accountability so that the levers still are with you, you're not losing control because
[Guest]: they're afraid of losing control. Sometimes it's legitimate concerns. I also respect that.
[Guest]: Many people say, look, almost everything you say, we agree, but local governments, you're
[Guest]: too romantic. No, there is almost corruption, which is true. I'm not denying it. There's
[Guest]: vote buying, which is true. I'm not denying it. But you have all those things. You can't
[Guest]: use that as an argument. But even then, I don't want to say that. You hold them to account.
[Guest]: Create strong accountability instruments and keep them broadly under your supervision.
[Guest]: I have no quarrel with that. I think if you create that framework, at least in cities,
[Guest]: I don't think it will happen easily in villages for two reasons. One, it's much bigger. Parties
[Guest]: don't want to lose control. Two, and this is a very sad statement I'm making, I grew
[Guest]: up in a village. Given the way our economy has progressed over the years, there's nothing
[Guest]: of leadership left in villages. There is neither money nor talent available in villages. Almost
[Guest]: anybody who has ambition and ability had to necessarily migrate to urban areas. And therefore,
[Guest]: in the current local governments in the village, unless you establish larger local units, not
[Guest]: a village panchayat of 2000 population, not 1.5 million or a million panchayats, all this
[Guest]: is, in my judgment, a very romantic, silly notion. If you create larger entities like
[Guest]: Kerala has done, and then empower, then rural areas also similar thing is possible. But
[Guest]: right now, I don't see that. Urban area, people for the first time are aware that they're
[Guest]: paying taxes. And urban local governments largely self sustained. And people are increasingly
[Guest]: angry that despite paying property taxes, my services are very poor. They're angry.
[Guest]: I think if that can be harnessed, I think that can be potentially transformational thing.
[Amit Varma]: And you speak about how things can change, you say the people of Mumbai raise their voice
[Amit Varma]: for the people of, you know, Chennai raise their voice or whatever, in your time in general,
[Amit Varma]: how has the expression of politics within civil society changed? Is do you find civil
[Amit Varma]: society expressing itself more or less? Is technology somewhat of a factor in that that
[Amit Varma]: it becomes possible for so many people who otherwise would not have had a platform or
[Amit Varma]: a megaphone to actually go on Twitter or wherever and express
[Guest]: undoubtedly reaching out to people and mobilizing people is much easier than it was when I started
[Guest]: in 1996. After leaving the civil service, I mean, I remember the amount of hardship
[Guest]: you had to undergo even for the simplest things. And today, in a jiffy, we can reach people.
[Guest]: But also, things have gotten infinitely worse in some other respect. At that time, and I'm
[Guest]: saying that serious sense of responsibility. A lot of middle classes are able to and willing
[Guest]: to go beyond caste, religion, religion and party. Even if they are committed to a particular
[Guest]: party, they're willing to look beyond that for the larger good of India, they were willing
[Guest]: to buy that argument and articulate that argument. Today, that capacity is significantly diminished,
[Guest]: because we're much more polarized, much more acerbic, much more volatile, and much more
[Amit Varma]: hate filled. That is scary. No, and I was at an event last evening where I was talking
[Amit Varma]: about how even if liberalism has been failed by politics, it can still be enabled by technology
[Amit Varma]: like technology enables individual freedom and enables us in so many ways. And then one
[Amit Varma]: person from the audience shut me up very wisely by pointing out that look what happened in
[Amit Varma]: Kashmir, that where the power of the state being what it is, sure, all the technology
[Amit Varma]: is there, but they're not even allowed to go on the internet. So what is still a special
[Guest]: situation, I would not be alarmist about that, because I would still say because of the historical
[Guest]: legacy and torturous history and, and the passions, etc. But even otherwise, even where
[Guest]: there are no constraints on the use of technology or your freedoms in general, what has happened
[Guest]: is political parties have almost become the new castes. The rigidity that was there throughout
[Guest]: our history in our caste system, which is hopefully sort of breaking down a little bit
[Guest]: in the past 50 or 100 years. Political parties that degree of rigidity, there's no willingness
[Guest]: to listen to the other person. There's no willingness to look at the issues beyond personalities.
[Guest]: If you admit for my like you, I agree with you, then whatever you say is right doesn't
[Guest]: matter how stupid or idiotic it is. If I don't like you, if I don't like your face for whatever
[Guest]: reason, then no matter how wise and wonderful and useful to me it is, I'm not going to listen.
[Guest]: So that's a very dangerous situation. I think in a very significant measure, I don't think
[Guest]: that is the whole of India. But I think that is the dominant part of India locally right
[Guest]: now. And I think in many other countries, I don't think United States is different.
[Guest]: It's as messed up as we are, but they can afford that mess, because they're at a much
[Guest]: higher level of evolution and their local governments are so strong. Ultimately, if
[Guest]: you take away a federal government and the basic headlines, their lives will not be altered.
[Guest]: Whereas in our country, I think we are in a grave danger. We are completely ignoring
[Guest]: things that actually matter to us and paying a heavy price.
[Amit Varma]: No, in fact, there's a term popularized by the social scientist Cass Sunstein, which
[Amit Varma]: describes this very beautifully, it's group polarization. And, you know, he and his fellow
[Amit Varma]: researchers had carried out an experiment where they took people with specific views,
[Amit Varma]: like a bunch of conservatives or a bunch of liberals and put them in a room. And they
[Amit Varma]: found that at the end of a session of interacting with each other, the views of the group as
[Amit Varma]: a whole, had shifted beyond the most extreme individual in the group, which he called group
[Amit Varma]: polarization. And what because they are reinforcing each other, and they are each then also sort
[Amit Varma]: of signaling to each other how true they are to their cause, and so on. And what the internet
[Amit Varma]: does is that it enables this at scale. So you have this group polarization happening
[Amit Varma]: at scale, these giant echo chambers where everyone is posturing to raise their stature
[Amit Varma]: within their in group. And soon what happens is that issues don't matter. It's it's, it's
[Amit Varma]: a complete tribal war. And, you know, one of the ways in which I gauge whether a person
[Amit Varma]: is thinking about politics deeply, is whether their support of a politician of a party or
[Amit Varma]: opposition to a party is absolute or is contingent around specific issues. You know, I remember
[Amit Varma]: people who would criticize the BJP for opposing FDA in retail, continuing to criticize them
[Amit Varma]: after they allowed it. You know, so the whatever you do, whatever you do, right? Yeah, you
[Amit Varma]: are the enemy, you are the other, you know, and there's nothing that can happen about
[Guest]: this. It's a very troublesome thing. And I'm sure that senior leadership in all parties
[Guest]: is aware, whether it's Narendra Modi, or Mrs. Sonia Gandhi, or Sharath Pawar, or many others.
[Guest]: But I think they're also in many ways helpless, because if you antagonize the base too much,
[Guest]: then you lose your foundations. If you allow them a free rein, then you lose the very purpose.
[Guest]: I think we are now in that very dangerous phase. Let's hope sanity will prevail. I really
[Guest]: don't have an easy answer to this. And what you're doing, that's why it's amazing that
[Guest]: actually people are willing to listen to an issue beyond parties without categorizing
[Guest]: Amit Verma or JP or somebody else. Are you BJP? Are you Congress? Are you Hindutva? Are
[Guest]: you anti-Hindutva? Without categorizing that you're able to engage the attention of a significant
[Guest]: number of people in a thoughtful discussion. I think that's an incredible thing. I don't
[Guest]: know how far this can spread or many such efforts can be made. But this is one small
[Guest]: little contribution you and I can make.
[Amit Varma]: How was your journey in electoral politics? Like you were earlier in politics of the other
[Amit Varma]: kind, the kind of politics we are engaging in, where you try to convince people and change
[Amit Varma]: hearts and minds. And then you enter electoral politics, where you're actually going up in
[Amit Varma]: front of people and saying, hey, vote for me. One, was there any dissonance there? Was
[Amit Varma]: it hard for you as a person as a thinker to actually go out there and do that? And two,
[Amit Varma]: what was that whole experience like? Did it in some sense disillusion you about?
[Guest]: Not at all. Not at all. You see, unlike in the marketplace, in the political marketplace
[Guest]: in our electoral system, it's all or none. But if you actually take that out and look
[Guest]: at the public support or their respect for these ideas or their willingness to consider,
[Guest]: then it's a huge success. But because of electoral system compulsions and the political consequences,
[Guest]: for instance, in 2014, despite everything else, there was a realistic chance that I
[Guest]: would have been the representative of the people for the Lok Sabha. But because the
[Guest]: unique situation in Andhra Pradesh, Telangana at the time, though that was still Andhra
[Guest]: Pradesh, but Telangana was already decided and the date was after post-election. I contested
[Guest]: from Hyderabad city. Some significant political parties offered me space in some other places.
[Guest]: They would have got me elected, but I decided not to use that because even if I stay away
[Guest]: from that, they would still be indulging in the normal practices and I didn't want that
[Guest]: way. I said, if I have to make an impact, it has to be not being merely a legislator
[Guest]: or a parliamentarian, but the way I want it to be. Any other way is not worthwhile. Now,
[Guest]: the reason why ultimately that didn't work out is my constituents, the largest in India
[Guest]: at that time in terms of electorate strength. The people of Telangana origin, they could
[Guest]: see that I am their best choice, but they were afraid that if they voted for me, their
[Guest]: primary enemy at that time politically, TDP would win. The people of Andhra origin, they
[Guest]: could see that I was their best choice. They were afraid that if they voted for me, their
[Guest]: primary enemy, TRS would win. I got crushed between the two. That's one. Second, what
[Guest]: did Narendra Modi do in India to many people like us in a political sense? What is the
[Guest]: public perception of people like us? Now, we want to bring about some change, a honesty,
[Guest]: be good governance. If you want to capture in two expressions, Narendra Modi in the eyes
[Guest]: of the majority of the middle class and young people in the country embodied both whether
[Guest]: delivery was there or not, you forget that. But in the popular imagination in 2014, he
[Guest]: embodied these two. Therefore, our cloak was taken over by him. So between these two patterns,
[Guest]: obviously, were rejected. So in our electoral system, electoral politics and outcomes are
[Guest]: much too complex. It's not about you. We will be very arrogant and ignorant if we thought
[Guest]: it's about you. It's about a process and a situation and a context.
[Amit Varma]: The currents of history and society are too strong for any one person to fight. I have
[Amit Varma]: some further sort of questions arising out of this. One is really a two part question.
[Amit Varma]: And I often ask, I've asked this to guests who've, you know, been here to speak about
[Amit Varma]: Indian politics and the BJP per se, which is that there seems to be a very interesting
[Amit Varma]: duality at play. One is that the BJP is a one party that to some extent does embody
[Amit Varma]: a particular ideology and a set of principles, whether one agrees with them or not. And those
[Amit Varma]: that ideology and that set of principles has brought them very far. But on the other hand,
[Amit Varma]: what you see in, say, the sort of political alliances and the maneuverings that Amit Shah
[Amit Varma]: has done, who seems to me from a distance to be an absolutely brilliant political strategist,
[Amit Varma]: he seems to embody the will to power, that we must come to power at any cost. If that
[Amit Varma]: means alliances with people we otherwise abused, we will do that. If it means poaching people
[Amit Varma]: from other parties, while till yesterday, we had set our IT cell on them, we will do
[Amit Varma]: that also. And it seems to me at some level, and this is why it's a two part question,
[Amit Varma]: because one, it's about the BJP that is there a conflict between their core ideology and
[Amit Varma]: this will to power? And if so, how will it manifest? Will they become a bigger version,
[Amit Varma]: a different version of what the Congress itself was once driven by nothing but the will to
[Amit Varma]: power? And the second question is a broader question, and would apply even to you that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you might get into politics with a set of principles, but what you need to
[Amit Varma]: survive is that will to power where compromises have to be made, such as the compromise you
[Amit Varma]: mentioned you refuse to make when it came to taking the ticket of one party or the other.
[Amit Varma]: How does one then reconcile that?
[Guest]: Let me take the first question first. I think there are, there are many strands here. The
[Guest]: first is, one of the great challenges of right wing parties all over the world is without
[Guest]: taking a certain position, which may not be entirely modern and liberal, you cannot have
[Guest]: the base with you. But without having the capacity to attract the economic liberals
[Guest]: and the modernists, you cannot have a majority, nor can you actually take the country forward.
[Guest]: The rest of the world grappled with that. Take the Christian Democrats in Germany, take
[Guest]: the conservatives in the United States. Similarly, many Republicans in the United States and
[Guest]: many others elsewhere, conservatives in Britain, etc, etc. I think India has this unique experience,
[Guest]: new experience. And I think our leadership is grappling with that. They're not able to
[Guest]: figure out what is the best way of doing that. But even elsewhere in the world, let's be
[Guest]: fair. In recent times, the consensus we thought that existed suddenly is breaking down. Angela
[Guest]: Merkel suddenly is now facing from AFD, the Nazi party, that the core is now moving some
[Guest]: respect to that. And Republicans in the United States, suddenly we find that something strange
[Guest]: is happening. So even there, after having solved the problem, they discovered the problem
[Guest]: again comes back. Any country as complex and as, as shall I say, limited in democratic
[Guest]: experience as India is, I think it's even a harder problem. I think we must understand
[Guest]: that without being excessively judgmental. That is one broad thing. The second broad
[Guest]: thing is that's what is disturbing. If Mr. Amit Shah and Mr. Narendra Modi are thinking
[Guest]: of getting into power at any cost and will to power is there, will to power is necessary
[Guest]: for politics. There's no question about it. But if will to power without purpose becomes
[Guest]: the dominant feature, how are we different from the Congress regime? That's exactly the
[Guest]: criticism against Congress for a long, long period. After the 1960s, the primary attack
[Guest]: on Congress with complete justification was that there was a will to power without any
[Guest]: purpose. If you become a clone of Congress, of course you will survive in power. Congress
[Guest]: survived for 30, 40 years in power like that. But is that your purpose in life? Did Narendra
[Guest]: Modi give up his personal life, his economic fortunes, and the many things that people
[Guest]: treasure, his family and many things for a cause that he believed in passionately? Is
[Guest]: this the net outcome? I think there's a question that many genuinely thoughtful people who
[Guest]: care and cared for India deeply, they must ponder. I'm not questioning the need for power,
[Guest]: but for power without purpose is the most dangerous thing. I think now there is a, there
[Guest]: is a problem, but let me look at it positively. In today's democratic world, Mr. Narendra
[Guest]: Modi is possibly the most powerful leader. I'm not talking of global power. Obviously
[Guest]: anybody in America, even an idiot will be more powerful than an Indian leader. That's
[Guest]: not the issue, but within the polity whose word has the greatest consequences or where
[Guest]: the greatest power to bring about change. I think Mr. Modi is probably number one in
[Guest]: the world today. There's an immense opportunity. It may not be recaptured again for a long
[Guest]: time for another 20, 25 years. I hope, and those who pray, I think we all should pray
[Guest]: that the ruling establishment will discover the purpose of that power to really transform
[Guest]: the country because they have this ability. Mr. Modi can change the electoral system.
[Guest]: He can carry the people with him. He can decentralize power without too much of a discord with the
[Guest]: legislators. He can improve accountability and service delivery genuinely through instruments
[Guest]: of law and institutional mechanisms without much resistance. These are very hard for normal
[Guest]: politicians in normal times to do. Mr. Modi has this, you can completely change the rule
[Guest]: of law. Mr. Modi and Mr. Amit Shah together can easily change the rule of law. Mr. Amit
[Guest]: Shah is talking even recently. I was happy to hear that. I hope there is some genuine
[Guest]: desire how third degree and abuse of power have become endemic in rule of law because
[Guest]: he sees himself as a victim of that process, for instance. If he really wants it, you can
[Guest]: actually do something significant about it. And these are huge things. Conceptually, they
[Guest]: may not be big, but operationally, they are huge things. Here is a priceless opportunity
[Guest]: where in a democratic system without a Xi Jinping or an authoritarian regime, the leadership
[Guest]: has the power, actual power to change things with the consent of the people. I hope they
[Guest]: discover the immense opportunity that's presenting themselves instead of merely wasting their
[Guest]: energies and enhancing their footprint as a political party and making some more fellows
[Guest]: MLAs and MPs. I don't understand how that matters. I hope you'll forgive me for being
[Amit Varma]: glib, but you know, the hope you expressed could also be summed up by saying power corrupts
[Amit Varma]: absolute power reforms. I, you know, I, I'm a little skeptical about that because we've
[Guest]: seen the last five years. See, if you don't have faith in human nature, and if you don't
[Guest]: somehow hope that a leader's sense of glory, ultimately you want to be among the history
[Guest]: books. If you don't believe that leader's sense of glory could actually be a transformational
[Guest]: thing for a society, then all political process is about who is in power. I believe that there
[Guest]: is a immense possibility, and I hope that possibility will be exercised. And I think
[Guest]: come election time, if you're all disappointed, we'll, we'll vote for or against somebody
[Guest]: or other, that doesn't matter. But as long as that possibility exists, even as we reserve
[Guest]: the right to criticize what we believe is wrong and to hopefully correct it, we must
[Guest]: also be willing to be engaged and see what best can be done with the opportunity available
[Guest]: today. Otherwise each time, wait for the next election and each time be disappointed. That's
[Guest]: not the best thing. Many people who are deeply unhappy with BJP today were deeply unhappy
[Guest]: with Congress earlier, or some other party earlier. So if you're perpetually deeply unhappy,
[Guest]: if you're not willing to engage and then see what best can be done to improve things, then
[Amit Varma]: I don't understand what the hell we are doing. And, you know, I totally agree with you that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, being human, we are motivated by the quest for glory and to leave a legacy
[Amit Varma]: and so on. But equally, it might be argued that those guys in power right now would define
[Amit Varma]: glory a little bit differently than us, where they might think of glory in terms of a Hindu
[Amit Varma]: Rashtra building great statues or temples or, or whatever, which kind of brings me to
[Amit Varma]: my next question, which is a question about what we are fundamentally as a society, like
[Amit Varma]: one of the dilemmas that I have had, and I've posed to various guests, and I'd love your
[Amit Varma]: response on this is that much as you know, our constitution isn't liberal enough for
[Amit Varma]: me, but it is still relatively liberal. It has liberal elements, but it seems to me,
[Amit Varma]: and this is a criticism I later found Dindayal Upadhyay himself had made in a different language,
[Amit Varma]: is that our constitution is a liberal constitution imposed upon an illiberal society. And the
[Amit Varma]: dilemma therefore, is how can that imposition be liberal? Can you impose liberalism on someone
[Amit Varma]: because the act of imposition changes it? And is there not something incongruous about
[Amit Varma]: that?
[Guest]: I don't agree. I believe fundamentally, Indian society has been always liberal for a long
[Guest]: time. It's the most eclectic civilization in human history. Whereas did Islam come peacefully
[Guest]: and survive without too much of strife? Whereas did Christianity come peacefully and these
[Guest]: are all very early, immediately after the prophets passing, within years, Islam came
[Guest]: to India. And the Moplah and other Muslims, they still practice without too much of problem.
[Guest]: Almost within years after Jesus Christ's crucifixion, St. Thomas landed on the Malabar coast, and
[Guest]: even today, Syrian Christians continue to practice that pretty peacefully. Not only
[Guest]: practice, but also we learn from each other and embrace. We all know the eclectic nature
[Guest]: of our civilization. Or Judaism 2000, later on, or Judaism 2600 years ago. I think it
[Guest]: is part of the Indian ethos, you know, live and let live. And embrace as much as possible.
[Guest]: And create another God and then pay homage. If Sir Arthur Cotton, who 150 years ago built
[Guest]: wonderful irrigation projects in Godavari Delta here, and Tanjore, and Tamil Nadu, etc,
[Guest]: etc. Actually, during his lifetime, he built temples and worshipped. Even today, there
[Guest]: are slokas chanting mantras about Sir Arthur Cotton. It's a beautiful thing. So I believe
[Guest]: fundamentally our society is inclusive and liberal with certain huge distortions of caste
[Guest]: system and many other less than happy practices on account of tradition. But that's true with
[Guest]: most societies in some form or the other. Therefore, I don't believe that the constitution
[Guest]: in that sense was an imposition. Actually, it was a reflection of our society. What has
[Guest]: happened over a period of time is, I think, I'm not a scholar in this respect, I'm only
[Guest]: a keen student of history. A, we did not realize the various strands of nationalism that operated
[Guest]: for about 100 years before freedom. And there is a lot of suppressed anger on account of
[Guest]: non recognition that is surfacing. B, the traumatic, extraordinarily traumatic events
[Guest]: of partition. I don't think as a nation we have ever come to terms with that. We sort
[Guest]: of put it away in history books somewhere and a partition happened. Unlike, you know,
[Guest]: the Germans, for instance, who ad nauseum talk about the Holocaust and what happened
[Guest]: in Nazism or somewhere else, something else, or civil war in the US, etc. In India, somehow,
[Guest]: we want to pretend it didn't happen. Well, for me, sitting in Hyderabad or in a village
[Guest]: in Costal Andhra or in Tamil Nadu, it didn't happen. But I think for a significant number
[Guest]: of people in certain parts of India, it happened, it's very real, it impacted their lives and
[Guest]: their ancestors lives and their families. I think by by suppressing it, pretending it
[Guest]: was not there, I think we did damage to ourselves. Again, there's a payback period. And the third
[Guest]: strand is, and this is what is disconcerting. Because perhaps of these factors, and because
[Guest]: the reform movement has disappeared in India, in a religious sense, largely, and during
[Guest]: freedom struggle, nationalism, enlightenment, reform, they all move together. Somehow that
[Guest]: we gave up for some reason. Therefore, the most narrow interpretation of the Hindu philosophy
[Guest]: or religion, they have become now, the most vocal, I don't know if they're the most dominant,
[Guest]: not yet, I believe, but they're the most vocal ones. You and I, I can speak for myself, we
[Guest]: can hold many views and still be broadly part of Hindu society. I mean, Charvaka was a atheist,
[Guest]: and there are many, many others, Kanada and others, etc. We are comfortable with that.
[Guest]: This is true Hinduism, without losing our moorings or our traditions. But the narrow
[Guest]: interpretation that happened in the recent past, in particular, because other factors
[Guest]: that I mentioned, because it's the most vocal one, that is what gives us a tremendous cause
[Guest]: for discomfort, and the feeling that illiberal Hinduism is there, but I don't think Hinduism
[Guest]: per se is illiberal. I'm not saying it out of any linguistic pride, but I truly believe
[Guest]: so. Even as I recognize that all religion, ultimately, is a myth. All religion, because
[Guest]: I believe it's a necessary myth for the majority of people. Because many evolutionary biologists
[Guest]: say that religion and faith are hardwired into your DNA. I'm willing to buy that. Therefore,
[Guest]: we must respect that. But we must also modernize it. And I think Hinduism has been modernized
[Guest]: significantly and is capable of being modernized further. But that modernization project probably
[Guest]: is now halted a little bit for the time being.
[Amit Varma]: You're actually the second person in two days pushing back at my assertion that India is
[Amit Varma]: an illiberal society. Yesterday at this event where I gave a talk, this friend of mine Vikram
[Amit Varma]: insisted that India has always been and his formulation was interesting. He said, India
[Amit Varma]: has always been a liberal society ruled by illiberal states. And I, you know, I agree
[Amit Varma]: to the extent that yes, we have been very tolerant of diversity, we've absorbed influences.
[Amit Varma]: I had a great episode on Indian food about how everything we regard as Indian food came
[Amit Varma]: from outside and we embraced it. Even the elegant churidar kurta that our Prime Minister
[Amit Varma]: wears is after all, not had its origin in India. But at the same time, I would sort
[Amit Varma]: of double down on the illiberalism that I believe is there by saying that, look at the
[Amit Varma]: status of women in India through the centuries, you know, right from our epics till the modern
[Amit Varma]: day, you know, like you must have read Uganda by Ravati Karve, which, you know, sort of
[Amit Varma]: looks at our epics of Mahabharata and Ramayana and she talks about the deep level of misogyny
[Amit Varma]: and sexism in those which are embedded in our culture in a thousand invisible ways and
[Amit Varma]: it's almost sort of normalized. But, you know, we can agree to disagree on that aspect.
[Guest]: Let me take this a little bit. Your critique is not of Indian society, but of religion
[Guest]: per se. There's not a single religion that was not misogynistic and sexist. True. At
[Guest]: the same time, right from Raja Ram Mohan Roy and Mr. Nitya Sagar and many other reformers
[Guest]: over a period of time and the Indian society and state the way they embraced. I think increasingly
[Guest]: the Hindu society, I am now specifically talking Hindu society and Indian society, they're
[Guest]: recognizing the value of women and I think today things are getting better. I don't get
[Guest]: depressed about it. My mother could not go to the village to study. She was really bright.
[Guest]: She is bright because her father said, how can my daughter go to another village and
[Guest]: study? Today it's unthinkable. And we are more than happy, at least middle and upper
[Guest]: classes, even the poorer sections to really allow the women to girls to fulfill their
[Guest]: potential and give an opportunity. There are still serious problems. That's because the
[Guest]: way we raise our children is terrible. The boys have pampered too much and then given
[Guest]: a sense of entitlement. And there is a deeper failing in India, and that is education, not
[Guest]: merely about math and literacy, but it's about the way to think. And I think that is that
[Guest]: failure that is manifesting today. Because with advancing time, I don't think we are
[Guest]: sufficiently enlightened because the capacity to think is now diminished because of a horrible
[Guest]: educational process. But I don't think the society is in general becoming more liberal.
[Guest]: I reject that hypothesis. Your critique is religion. It's not India. My assertion wasn't
[Amit Varma]: that we are becoming illiberal. My assertion was that we've always been illiberal and yes,
[Amit Varma]: the arc of history as Martin Luther King would have said, perhaps does move in the direction
[Amit Varma]: of freedom and liberalism. But by and large, it would seem to many people like something
[Amit Varma]: that often seems to me to hold a ring of truth is that what we have in the success of the
[Amit Varma]: BJP since 2014 is a political expression of our social instincts.
[Guest]: As I said, some element of that is definitely there.
[Guest]: It's simplistic on the whole units. I think it's simplistic because if BJP, God forbid,
[Guest]: does not deliver economic growth and many things that we want as a society, BJP will
[Guest]: pay the same price that Congress paid. If what you say is true, then it has to be static
[Guest]: world. Politically speaking, BJP must be sure of itself, no matter what happens, because
[Guest]: you have a majority with you and they're all imbued by a sense of a narrow notion of nationalism
[Guest]: and Hinduism. And therefore, politically, there is no further moment. It's end of history.
[Amit Varma]: I don't think that's true.
[Amit Varma]: This actually segues very nicely into my last question. I've taken more than two hours of
[Amit Varma]: your time, and I'm very grateful you, you know, gave me the honor of coming on the show.
[Amit Varma]: And that question is basically this, that, you know, just carrying on from your assertion
[Amit Varma]: that if Mr. Modi does not deliver, he will be voted out. But he did not deliver in the
[Amit Varma]: last five years. And he did get voted in, you know, after massive Big Bang deforms like
[Amit Varma]: liberalization and the botch DST. And equally in the past, we have seen the watch by government,
[Amit Varma]: which I thought was a pretty good government. I mean, I, you know, get voted out, unexpected.
[Amit Varma]: 2004 was a shocker to me, certainly in much of the country. Yes. And I think he's an extremely
[Amit Varma]: underrated Prime Minister. And my question, therefore, is that, you know, one criticism
[Amit Varma]: I often make of Modi, and I don't even know if it's a fair criticism, because this is
[Amit Varma]: inevitable and rational behavior, is that he focuses far more on optics and governance.
[Amit Varma]: Now, the thing is, the way our election cycles are, for example, there's always a state election
[Amit Varma]: around the corner, it's natural for a party to always be on campaigning mode than governing
[Amit Varma]: mode. But a greater worry here is that perhaps they have hit upon this possible truth that
[Amit Varma]: narratives matter more than reality itself, you know, and that therefore control of the
[Amit Varma]: narrative is the most important thing. It doesn't matter if you don't deliver in terms
[Amit Varma]: of governance, it doesn't matter if you carry out something like demonetization, which I
[Amit Varma]: consider the largest assault on property rights in human history, you still win the UP election
[Amit Varma]: by a landslide after that, you know, with the economy going the way it is, you still
[Amit Varma]: win the 2019 general elections. So the larger question there is that, you know, are we given
[Amit Varma]: that narratives are so important? I'm not saying reality doesn't matter, maybe at some
[Amit Varma]: point when things get really bad, the narrative changes accordingly. But given that narratives
[Amit Varma]: matter so much, is our fundamental political challenge, therefore, to frame the right narratives?
[Amit Varma]: And if so, how has your thinking evolved, not just in the kinds of narratives that we
[Amit Varma]: need to put forward in our political rhetoric in this course, but also tactically? What,
[Amit Varma]: you know, tactically and strategically broadly, what are the sort of narratives we need to
[Amit Varma]: build? And tactically, how do we make those narratives appealing to people? I think most
[Guest]: democracies have this challenge, and it's increasing a between style and substance,
[Guest]: be between the tactics required to acquire power and the wisdom required to govern well
[Guest]: use that power wisely. Mr. Modi has, has been an irredeemable campaigner, is perhaps one
[Guest]: of the most effective marketing persons, politically speaking, you know, sort of articulate, you
[Guest]: know, to inspire how to get loyalty and how to acquire power and retain power. But I think
[Guest]: it's time that the grander purpose, a larger sense of where India is headed, takes a dominant
[Guest]: role rather than getting your footprint wider. There's no doubt about it. I think many people
[Guest]: believe that the opportunity is very great, and it has not been harnessed the way it should
[Guest]: have been. And merely because I market it well, doesn't make the outcome substantial.
[Guest]: For instance, and I'm saying this with great pain. And it's not about Narendra Modi or
[Guest]: somebody else's what happened over 70 years. Out of the 49 large economies in the world,
[Guest]: large economy defined as a country with more than $200 billion GDP. If you take all the
[Guest]: standard parameters of development and civilization, quantity of water supply, quality of water,
[Guest]: the sanitation, stormwater drainage, number of years of schooling, quality of education,
[Guest]: outcomes, infant mortality, immunization, you name it, standard things where data is
[Guest]: available and authentic by and large. I did nothing extra. I just took the data. I said
[Guest]: out of the 49 countries, where does India stand? On every single indicator without exception,
[Guest]: India stood in bottom five. We were never above 45th rank. We ranged from 45th to 49th.
[Guest]: There were three countries which were consistently in this group of five, apart from India, Pakistan.
[Guest]: I don't even know why we're fighting. We're doing exactly the same things to our people.
[Guest]: Bangladesh, Nigeria. If Mr. Modi, I believe he does, wants greatness of India, that greatness
[Guest]: lies in this. We don't deserve to be in the bottom five. If that, the political system
[Guest]: understands and we can easily overcome that because we have so many advantages in this
[Guest]: country, huge advantages, but we're not harnessing them. If that recognition dawns in them, that
[Guest]: the great India that they dreamt, why did Mr. Modi as a relative teenager or early youth
[Guest]: gave up his family and everything and did something? There is certainly a deep inspiration,
[Guest]: Vivekananda, Bhagavad Gita, Hindutva, culture, national greatness. There are some ideas beyond
[Guest]: individual gain, but if those ideas are not translated into true greatness of this country,
[Guest]: then I think all of us will regard our lives wasted. I'm sure the leadership in this country
[Guest]: of all parties, one day wakes up and I hope all of us will make them aware of this.
[Guest]: So for instance, I don't think people seriously looked at where we are among 49 large economies
[Guest]: in the world. This is not a groundbreaking story, but we didn't look at it that way.
[Guest]: We look at our aggregates and we talk about we being the next China or fight in our economy.
[Guest]: Of course, we are so big. One sixth of humanity will always have 3% of GDP. Even if you're
[Guest]: doing terribly badly, that is not really greatness. Where are we in terms of averages? If our
[Guest]: education or school education level is second to bottom, the only country being worse than
[Guest]: Indian states being Kyrgyzstan, which was fortunately for India included in that survey
[Guest]: of PISA. And the only response of the Indian government is that India shall not participate
[Guest]: in PISA in future. And after 12 years, now they decided after, after 10 years that in
[Guest]: 2021, we'll participate, but only for select central schools and, and, uh, no other schools.
[Guest]: Are we actually facing reality and trying to change it? Or are we accepting reality
[Guest]: as it is today and pretending that we are doing better than what we actually are? I
[Guest]: think this question, honestly, we must all ask ourselves. And I think the discourse in
[Guest]: the media too, I am equally sharply critical of the media. When did this become an issue?
[Guest]: Why doesn't it become an issue in a country which is so badly governed? If our education
[Guest]: or healthcare or rule of law, and the way the basic communities are delivered or not
[Guest]: delivered our service delivery, those don't become daily issues, badgering us, bullying
[Guest]: us because this is our life. We face it every day. And if you think some grand power game,
[Guest]: like a 2020 cricket match, whether Virat Kohli who scored a century or not, if that is your
[Guest]: dominant issue, then I think the blame equally rests with us as a, as a media and the public
[Guest]: opinion makers and the leaders in various other fields.
[Amit Varma]: As someone who works with young people a lot, uh, you know, through the years, do the young
[Amit Varma]: people of India give you hope because they're responding, they're empowered by technology,
[Amit Varma]: they're responding to global trends or, uh, are they lost in their devices?
[Guest]: There is a slice of young people, extraordinary skill, ability, intelligence, exposure, dedication
[Guest]: and innovation that gives me immense hope. For instance, in school education, the kind
[Guest]: of things that many people independently independent of the government or sometimes working with
[Guest]: the government attempting, it's so heartwarming and young people at large are obviously always
[Guest]: idealistic in every generation. Therefore, again, there is that energy, but the way we
[Guest]: are disempowering young people by substandard, abysmally poor education, it's hard to reach
[Guest]: them intellectually because education has failed to replace that through our other kind
[Guest]: of public communication and to make them think is a very hard task.
[Guest]: We all have to attempt that, but there's no substitute to improving at least the school
[Guest]: education to start with so that they can think a little better. So it's a mixed bag. Obviously
[Guest]: there's hope because younger generation is always more, uh, more idealistic and more
[Guest]: willing to take risks and they have the future. It's their future that's decided. Uh, and
[Guest]: there are immensely skilled people and talented people who, I mean, the kind of skills and
[Guest]: abilities that they have, I cannot even imagine. They are way, way above what I ever was that
[Guest]: I am in my life. But a whole lot of young people in a country where we pretend that
[Guest]: we are doing well, they are so denied the basic tools to fulfill their potential that
[Guest]: even if they have a vague desire to improve things, they're not yet partners in this change.
[Amit Varma]: Hopefully they'll get there. JP, you're an inspiration to me and I'm sure to many, many
[Amit Varma]: of my listeners. Thank you so much for coming on the show. Thank you. The pleasure is mine.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the show, do follow JP Narayan on Twitter at JP underscore Lok
[Amit Varma]: Satta. That's JP underscore L O K S A T T A. You can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma
[Amit Varma]: A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A. You can browse past episodes of The Scene and the Unseen at sceneunseen.in,
[Amit Varma]: thinkpragati.com and ivmpodcast.com. The Scene and the Unseen is supported by the Takshashila
[Amit Varma]: Institution. Postgraduate courses in public policy begin in January. For more information,
[Unknown]: check out takshashila.org.in. Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: How aware do you think you are of your laws and rights?
[Unknown]: Do you look up to laws when you are caught up in situations? Do you know what your rights are when you're stuck somewhere bad?
[Unknown]: Well, here's a show that can help you move an inch closer to being aware of what your rights are.
[Unknown]: Tune into Know Your Kanoon with me Amar Rana. This is a podcast meant to answer all your law related queries.
[Unknown]: Catch Know Your Kanoon every week on the IVM website or the app or anywhere you get your podcasts from.